Using Machine Learning Techniques for Stylometry
Ramyaa, Congzhou He, Khaled Rasheed
Artificial Intelligence Center
The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602 USA
Abstract
In this paper we describe our work which
attempts to recognize different authors based on
their style of writing (without help from genre or
period). Fraud detection, email classification,
deciding the authorship of famous documents
like the Federalist Papers1
, attributing authors to
pieces of texts in collaborative writing, and
software forensics are some of the many uses of
author attribution. In this project, we train
decision trees and neural networks to “learn” the
writing style of five Victorian authors and
distinguish between them based on certain
features of their writing which define their style.
The texts chosen were of the same genre and of
the same period to ensure that the success of the
learners would entail that texts can be classified
on the style or the “textual fingerprint” of
authors alone. We achieved 82.4% accuracy on
the test set using decision trees and 88.2%
accuracy on the test set using neural networks.
1. Introduction
Stylometry – the measure of style – is a burgeoning
interdisciplinary research area that integrates literary
stylistics, statistics and computer science in the study of
the “style” or the “feel” (of a document). The style of a
document is typically based on a lot of parameters – its
genre or the topic (which is used in text categorization),
its content, its authors - to name a few. Stylometry
assumes – in the context of author attribution - that there
is an unconscious aspect to an author’s style that cannot
be consciously manipulated but which possesses
quantifiable and distinctive features. These characteristic
features of an author should be salient, frequent, easily
quantifiable and relatively immune to conscious control.
In addition, these features need to be able to distinguish
authors writing in the same genre, similar topics and
periods so that the classifier is not helped by differences
in genre or English style which changes with time.
The origins of stylometry can be traced back to the mid
19th century, where the English logician Augustus de
Morgan suggested word length could be an indicator of
authorship. The real impact did not come until 1964,
when two American statisticians Mosteller and Wallace
decided to use word frequencies to investigate the
mystery of the authorship of The Federalist Papers.
1
Their conclusion from statistical discrimination methods
agreed with historical scholarship which gave stylometry
much needed credence [7]. Today with the help of many
other significant events in stylometry, its techniques are
being widely applied in various areas, such as, disease
detection and court trials. Examples of using stylometric
techniques as a forensic tool include the appeal in London
of Tommy McCrossen in July 1991, the pardon for Nicky
Kelly from the Irish government in April 1992, along with
others [7].
1.1 Features
There is no consensus in the discipline as to what
characteristic features to use or what methodology or
techniques to apply in standard research, which is
precisely the greatest problem confronting stylometry.
Most of the experiments in stylometry are directed to
different authors with different techniques; there has not
been a comparison of results on a large scale as to what
features are generally more representative or what
methods are typically more effective. [11] claims that
there is no clear agreement on which style markers are
significant. Rudman (1998) [11] notes that particular
words may be used for a specific classification (like The
Federalist Papers) but they cannot be counted on for style
analysis in general. Many different kinds of tests have
been proposed for use in author identification. Angela
Glover (1996) [1] gives a comprehensive table of the
features used in the tests.
“The following are some (tests) grouped by the degree of
linguistic analysis of the data that is required for the test
to be carried out.
1 During 1787 and 1788, 77 articles were anonymously
published to persuade New Yorkers to support ratification of the
new US constitution. Most of the articles were later attributed
credibly to their authors, except for 12 of them which were
claimed to be written by both General Alexander Hamilton and
President James Madison.1) Tagged text
a. Type / token ratio
b. Distribution of word classes (parts of speech)
c. Distribution of verb forms (tense, aspect, etc)
d. Frequency of word parallelism
e. Distribution of word-class patterns
f. Distribution of nominal forms (e.g., gerunds)
g. Richness of vocabulary
2) Parsed text
a. Frequency of clause types
b. Distribution of direction of branching
c. Frequency of syntactic parallelism
d. Distribution of genitive forms (of and ’s)
e. Distribution of phrase structures
f. Frequency of types of sentences
g. Frequency of topicalization
h. Ratio of main to subordinate clauses
i. Distribution of case frames
j. Frequency of passive voice
3) Interpreted text
a. Frequency of negation
b. Frequency of deixis
c. Frequency of hedges and markers of uncertainty
d. Frequency of semantic parallelism
e. Degree of alternative word use
It is reasonable that stylometers would not agree on the
characteristic features to be analyzed in stylometry.
Human languages are subtle, with many unquantifiable
yet salient qualities. Idiolects, moreover, complicate the
picture by highlighting particular features that are not
shared by the whole language community. Individual
studies on specific authors, understandably, rely on
completely different measures to identify an author.
1.2 Classifiers
Efstathios Stamatatos, (2000) [3] states that there is no
computational system as of today that can distinguish the
texts of a randomly-chosen group of authors without the
assistance of a human in the selection of both the most
appropriate set of style markers and the most accurate
disambiguation procedure.
Although there is a large variety in the methodology of
stylometry, the techniques may be roughly divided into
two classes: statistical methods and automated pattern
recognition methods. The statistical group of methods
normally features the application of Bayes’ Rule in
various ways to predict the probability of authorship; yet
non-Bayesian statistical analyses have also been done by
setting weights to different features. Statistical grouping
techniques such as cluster analysis have proven to be
useful by seeking to form clusters of individuals such that
individuals within a cluster are more similar in some
sense than individuals from other clusters [8]). The most
widely used among these is the Principal Components
Analysis (PCA), which arranges the observed variables in
decreasing order of importance and plots the data in the
space of just the first two components so that clustering is
clearly visible [2,6]. Gram analysis is another commonly
used technique. Text categorization, a related field, uses
statistical methods like the bag of words to classify
documents. Similar methods have also been tried for
author attribution.
 Automated pattern recognizing has also been used,
though not as much [9, 12 ,13]. This involves training a
neural network to learn the style of the texts. Neural
networks have been used to learn the general style (and
the genre) of a text and in text categorization. They have
also been used to learn one particular author’s style – to
distinguish the one author from all others or from another
particular author.
2 Components of the Problem
With automatic parsing algorithms getting more
sophisticated, we believe that the role of artificial
intelligence techniques in stylometry has great potential.
An automatic text reader to parse the documents was
written in Prolog to extract the data needed for the
experiments.
2.1 Authors
Author attribution of documents – the most popular use of
author recognition using stylometry – usually involves
attributing an author to a document when there is some
doubt about its authorship. This usually involves proving
(or disproving) that the document was written by a
particular author (to whom it has previously been
attributed to) [10]. At times, this also would involve
deciding between two authors. So, usually author
recognition is done to learn the style of one (or two)
author(s). This is inherently different from learning the
styles of a number of authors (or in “learning the style”)
because in case of one (or two) authors, the list of features
chosen may simply represent the authors’ particular
idiosyncrasies. However, these may not be in general
good features that can be taken to be representative of
authors’ style. For example, usage of the words “no
matter” may be a good feature that separates author X
from author Y, but it may not be a feature that can be used
to distinguish authors in general. In this paper we try to
learn the styles of five authors – in hopes that the learnerswould learn the general “style” of authors the rather than
the idiosyncrasies of a particular author.
Also, documents can have a distinctive style without it
being the style of the author. For instance, the texts from
the Victorian era (written by any author) would seem to
have the same style to a reader of this era. Thus, some
care was needed in the selection of the texts so that they
would not be easily distinguishable by their genre or
period. Also, the authors should not have very different
styles – or learning to differentiate between them would
be trivial.
Five popular Victorian authors are chosen for the
experiments: Jane Austen, Charles Dickens, William
Thackeray, Emily Brontë and Charlotte Brontë.2
 The
ASCII files of their works are freely downloadable at the
Gutenberg Project Website.
2.2 Features Used
Hanlein’s empirical research (1999) has yielded a set of
individual-style features, from which the 21 style
indicators in the present study are derived.
1. type-token ratio: The type-token ratio indicates the
richness of an author’s vocabulary. The higher the ratio,
the more varied the vocabulary. It also reflects an
author’s tendency to repeat words.
2. mean word length: Longer words are traditionally
associated with more pedantic and formal styles, whereas
shorter words are a typical feature of informal spoken
language.
3. mean sentence length: Longer sentences are often
the indicator of carefully planned writing, while shorter
sentences are more characteristic of spoken language.3
4. standard deviation of sentence length: The standard
deviation indicates the variation of sentence length, which
is an important marker of style.
5. mean paragraph length: The paragraph length is
much influenced by the occurrence of dialogues.
6. chapter length: The length of the sample chapter.
7. number of commas per thousand tokens: Commas
signal the ongoing flow of ideas within a sentence.
8. number of semicolons per thousand tokens:
Semicolons indicate the reluctance of an author to stop a
sentence where (s)he could.
9. number of quotation marks per thousand tokens:
Frequent use of quotations is considered a typical
involvement-feature [5].
10. number of exclamation marks per thousand tokens:
Exclamations signal strong emotions.
2
 In fact, many previous research included Austen and the
Brontë sisters because of their similarity.
3
 Mean sentence length has been considered by some as
unreliable, and the frequency distributions of the logarithms of
sentence length have been used as well.
11. number of hyphens per thousand tokens: Some
authors use hyphenated words more than others.
12. number of ands per thousand tokens: Ands are
markers of coordination, which, as opposed to
subordination, is more frequent in spoken production.
13. number of buts per thousand tokens: The contrastive
linking buts are markers of coordination too.
14. number of howevers per thousand tokens: The
conjunct “however” is meant to form a contrastive pair
with “but”.
15. number of ifs per thousand tokens: If-clauses are
samples of subordination.
16. number of thats per thousand tokens: Most of the
thats are used for subordination while a few are used as
demonstratives.
17. number of mores per thousand tokens: ‘More’ is an
indicator of an author’s preference for comparative
structure.
18. number of musts per thousand tokens: Modal verbs
are potential candidates for expressing tentativeness [5].
Musts are more often used non-epistemically.
19. number of mights per thousand tokens: Mights are
more often used epistemically.
20. number of thiss per thousand tokens: Thiss are
typically used for anaphoric reference.
21. number of verys per thousand tokens: Verys are
stylistically significant for its emphasis on its modifiees.
These attributes include some very unconventional
markers. Also, it is unconventional to use as few as
twenty-one attributes in stylistic studies. Usually, a huge
number of features (typically function words) are used .
In the following two sections, we discuss the learning
methods used and describe the experiments and the
results.
3. Decision Trees
Decision trees are rule based, explicit learners. Two
decision trees were made to learn the styles of the authors.
Text categorization uses decision trees extensively, but
they have not been used in author identification. Due to
their rule-based nature, it is easy to read and understand a
decision tree. Thus, it is possible to “see the style” in the
texts with these trees. Also, the results indicate that the
unconventional features we used are quite useful in
classification of the authors.3.1 Experiments and Results
The See5 package by Quinlan is used in this experiment,
which extends the basic ID3 algorithm of Quinlan. It
infers decision trees by growing them from the root
downward, greedily selecting the next best attribute for
each new decision branch added to the tree. Thus,
decision tree learning differs from other machine learning
techniques such as neural networks, in that attributes are
considered individually rather than in connection with one
another. The feature with the greatest information gain is
given priority in classification. Therefore, decision trees
should work very well if there are some salient features
that distinguish one author from the others.
Since the attributes tested are continuous, all the decision
trees are constructed using the fuzzy threshold parameter,
so that the knife-edge behavior for decision trees is
softened by constructing an interval close to the threshold.
The decision tree constructed without taking any other
options results in an error rate of 3.3% in the training set
and an error rate of 23.5% in the test set, (averaged from
cross validation) which is far above random guess (20%)
but which is still not satisfactory. To improve the
performance of the classifier, two different measures have
been taken: winnowing and boosting.
3.1.1WINNOWING
When the number of attributes is large, it becomes harder
to distinguish predictive information from chance
coincidences. Winnowing overcomes this problem by
investigating the usefulness of all attributes before any
classifier is constructed. Attributes found to be irrelevant
or harmful to predictive performance are disregarded
(“winnowed”) and only the remaining attributes are used
to construct the trees. As the relevance of features is one
of the things we experiment on, winnowing was used. The
package had a winnowing option which was used. This
also makes building the trees a lot faster.
The result of this part of the experiment is shown below
Decision tree:
semicolon <= 6.72646 (8.723425): charles (18/2)
semicolon >= 8.97227 (8.723425):
:...semicolon >= 16.2095 (14.64195): charlotte (11/1)
 semicolon <= 14.6293 (14.64195):
 :...but >= 4.71113 (4.69338): jane (15/1)
 but <= 4.67563 (4.69338):
 :...quotation mark <= 12.285 (14.7294): emily (10)
 quotation mark >= 17.1738 (14.7294): william (7)
Evaluation on training data (61 cases):
Tree Size Errors
 5 4 (6.6%) <<
 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)  classified as
 ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
 14 1 (a): class jane
 16 (b): class charles
 1 2 7 (c): class william
 10 (d): class emily
 10 (e): class charlotte
Evaluation on test data (17 cases):
 Tree Size Errors
 5 3 (17.6%) <<
 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)  classified as
 ---- ---- ---- ---- ----
 4 1 (a): class jane
 5 1 (b): class charles
 2 (c): class william
 1 1 (d): class emily
 2 (e): class charlotte
As shown, the decision tree has an accuracy of 82.4% on
the 17 patterns in the test set. Also, the tree shows that ‘;’
(semicolon) and quotation marks were relevant attributes
that define style (as they survived the winnowing).
3.1.2 BOOSTING
Boosting is a wrapping technique for generating and
combining classifiers to give improved predictive
accuracy. Boosting takes a generic learning algorithm and
adjusts the distribution given to it (by removing some
training data) based on the algorithm's behavior. The
basic idea is that, as learning progresses, the booster
samples the input distribution to keep the accuracy of the
learner's current hypothesis near to that of random
guessing. As a result, the learning process focuses on the
currently hard data. The boosting option in the package
causes a number of classifiers to be constructed; when a
case is classified, all the classifiers are consulted before a
decision is made. Boosting often gives higher predictive
accuracy at the expense of increased classifier
construction time. In this case, it yields the same error
rate as in winnowing in the validation set, but has 100%
accuracy in the training set. The result of this part of the
experiment is as follows:

As shown, the decision tree has an accuracy of 82.4% on
the 17 patterns in the test set.
Noticeably, the two decision trees are constructed using
different features and result in different classifications: in
particular, Chapter 1 in Tale of Two cities is classified as
written by Emily Brontë in the first case and as written by
William Thakeray in the second case. Many of the
conventional input attributes do not help in the
classification; yet, the frequency of certain punctuation
marks appears crucial in both of the decision trees, which
verifies our hypothesis that a very important aspect of
unconscious writing has been unduly ignored by
stylometers.
4. Neural Networks
Neural networks are powerful pattern matching tools.
They are basically very complex non-linear modeling
equations. They are especially good in situations where
the “concept” to be learned is very difficult to express as a
well-defined, simple formulation, but rather is a complex,
highly interrelated function of the inputs which is usually
not easily transparent. This feature makes them ideal to
learn a concept like “style” which is inherently intangible.
The network takes all input attributes into consideration
simultaneously though some are more heavily weighted
than others. This differs from decision tree construction
in that the style of an author is taken to be the joint
product of many different features. Artificial Neural
Networks has the ability to invent new features that are
not explicit in the input, yet it also has the drawback that
its inductive rules are inaccessible to humans.
4.1 Experiments and Results
 Neuroshell – the commercial software package created
by the Ward Systems Group, Inc. which is a package that
creates and runs various types of neural networks, was
used in this experiment.
 Many structures of the multilayer network were
experimented with before we came up with our best
network. Kohonen Self Organizing Maps, probability
networks, and networks based on statistical models were
some of the architectures tried. Backpropogation feed
forward networks yield the best result with the following
architecture: 21 input nodes, 15 nodes on the first hidden
layer, 11 nodes on the second hidden layer, and 10
output nodes (to act as error correcting codes). Two
output nodes are allotted to a single author. (This
increases the Hamming distance between the
classifications - the bit string that is output with each bit
corresponding to one author in the classification- of any
two authors, thus decreasing the possibility of
misclassification) 30% of the 61 training samples are used
in the validation set which determines whether overfitting
has occurred and when to stop training. Theremaining 17 samples were used for testing. This testing
is also used to decide the architecture of the network.
 After that, on the chosen network, cross validation was
done by using different test sets. There was not much
variation in the results obtained. On an average, the
accuracy (measured on the test set) is 88.2%. There is one
misclassification Pride and Prejudice which is
misclassified as written by Charlotte Brontë; there is one
misclassification in Tale of Two Cities - misclassified as
written by William Thackeray. These are the
misclassifications that were present in all the partitions
used for cross validation (irrespective of whether the
patterns are on testing set or in training/validation set).
The error obtained on one of the test sets is plotted in the
following graph. It was observed that the network learned
each author to be represented by two output nodes i.e.
both the output nodes representing the same author never
differed significantly in their values. So, the following
graph shows only one output node for each author. It plots
the error in all the output nodes for every pattern. Any
deviation from zero is not a perfect classification. Spikes
indicate the deviations from perfect classifications.
Positive spikes indicate that non-authors are classified as
authors and negative spikes indicate that authors are
classified as non-authors. If a spike goes above 0.5 (or
below -0.5), then a misclassification occurs.

Column AG Column AH Column AI Column AJ Column AK
Pattern
error
 Figure 1 error graph for Neural Networks
As can be seen, in the test set (the last quarter), there are
two misclassifications and there is one misclassification
in the training set. It is interesting to note that every
positive spike is accompanied by a negative spike. This
means that every pattern is classified as belonging to one
author and only one author. This is not built in. The
network is free to predict 0 for all authors or 1 for more
than one author – both meaning that it is undecided. This
was not explicitly avoided. Nevertheless, the network
always classified a pattern (either correctly or not).
The following table gives the classification of given by
the network of the training and the validation sets

Also, the patterns that decision trees misclassify are not
the same as those misclassified by the neural network,
although the misclassification is persistent within on
learning technique i.e. for more than one architecture, the
same patterns get misclassified in neural network;
Decision trees, with different parameters also have trouble
with a same set of patterns (different from the set that
troubles Artificial Neural Networks). The Neural Network
is obviously looking at some different attributes from the
ones that the decision trees look at.
5 Future Works
The fact that neural networks look at different features
from those considered by decision trees could be put to
use. A meta-learner could be trained to use both neural
network and decision trees to get near perfect
classifications.
Different set of features may be tried to see if there exists
a set of feature which makes different learning techniques
give the same results. Also feature extraction should be
done in some care to train these learners with the most
relevant features. Also, Automatic feature selecting
algorithms (like winnowing) can be used to select the
initial set of features.
The project could be extended to any number of authors.
This project can classify five authors. The next step could
be to generate abstract general inductive rules that can beused in all author identification problems instead of
learning the ways to separate a group of n chosen
authors.
Some clustering algorithms should be tried on the data to
see if they perform better. Self Organizing Maps were
tried. However, they did not yield good results. Other
statistical methods may provide better results.
6 Conclusions
This paper attempts to recognize different authors based
on their style of writing (without help from genre or
time). Both decision trees and Artificial Neural Networks
yield a significantly higher accuracy rate than random
guess, which shows that the assumption is well justified
that there is a quantifiable unconscious aspect in an
author’s style. We achieved 82.4% accuracy the test set
using decision trees and 88.2% accuracy on the test set
using neural networks. Although the neural networks
yielded a better numerical performance, and are
considered inherently suitable to capture an intangible
concept like style, the decision trees are human readable
making it possible to define style. Also, the results
obtained by both methods are comparable.
 Most of the previous studies in stylometry input a large
number of attributes, such as the frequencies of fiftynine
function words in some recent Federalist Papers
research. While more features could produce additional
discriminatory material, the present study proves that
artificial intelligence provides stylometry with excellent
classifiers that require fewer input variables than
traditional statistics. The unconventional features used as
style markers proved to be effective. The proven
efficiency of the automatic classifiers marks them as
exciting tools for the future in stylometry’s continuing
evolution (Holmes 1998: 115). We believe that the
combination of stylometry and AI will result in a useful
discipline with many practical applications.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr. Covington, Associate
Director, and Artificial Intelligence Center for his
advice and guidance. We are grateful to Dr. Potter,
graduate coordinator of Artificial Intelligence
Center, UGA for his help.