“Boston what are you doing out here?”
        “Hey Xavier, I'm planting the best garden tomatoes this city has ever seen.”
        “You don't rest do you. College gets out yesterday and you're out planting tomatoes. Do you even have the knowledge to plant such a thing. I don't remember you taking any classes in gardening, you were too busy in the sciences. How did your classes go by the way?”
        “Oh, they went good. But, little do you know my friend that my family has been producing the best tomatoes the city of Wellington or Chesterville has ever seen or tasted. Our growing tradition goes back generations.”
        “Yeah, well I hope you got permission to plant in this little lot behind our apartment complex. Chances are the manager won't mind, she is always happy, but still.”
        “I asked the manager, Linda is her name by the way. She is always happy, but not as happy as anyone who gets some of these tomatoes will be.”
        “You seem pretty confident there Boston, I think I will be right back.”
        Xavier went off in his truck. The noise of his large diesel engine alarming everyone within a sixty foot radius that Xavier was on the move. Boston continued to carefully plant his tomatoes not thinking of anything else but just gardening. He didn't want to strain his mind any further now that classes were out for the summer. The only thought that could get any room in his mind was the anticipation of returning home for the summer. Xavier and Brighton, Boston thought; are going to love getting home to see their families, especially to convey to them their success in research – of course they should be proud getting closer to curing the disease. Boston kept planting tomatoes hoping now that this would keep him from remembering his our research which didn't turn out as planned. At the end of the semester Xavier and Brighton were invited to present their research at “The Cure Conference”. Only the best minds were invited, and all those who received the invitation came. They would come from all over the World. Last year was the first time that more people from outside the United States came than those from the States. This years conference was to be held at the University of Wellington. The conference was a three day event as each researcher, scientist, Doctor, or young genius would present what they thought was the next lead to curing the disease. Xavier and Brighton readily accepted their invitation which was an honor for them and the town where all three had grown up together being best friends since before any of them can remember. As Boston thought more about the conference and how his research to find the cure had failed essentially getting no closer to helping anyone; he thought about his sister Lilly who had the disease. She was older than him but only by a few years. Lilly was bedridden and had been since getting the disease two years ago. JEX as the scientists called it, was spreading over parts of the World and Wellington was one of those select cities. Anyone with the disease can infect only one other person. No scientist or mind has been able to figure it out. Somehow Wellington has about 4,000 people infected, thus they will past the disease on to another 4,000 and soon 8,000 will be infected. The longest anyone has lived with JEX was old man Henderson who lived 4 years with JEX. Old man Henderson lived about 450 years back, as the legend goes.
        Xavier's truck and all it's noise came rumbling around the apartment complex and into sight. Boston stopped working and watched as Xavier and Brighton got out of the truck. Brighton started putting on sunscreen to protect his white skin, as Xavier walked straight over to Boston shouting through a laugh back to Brighton, “I have not been badly sun burnt since I was six!” Xavier was a very strong person and not just in muscle. He was firm in his believes being a religious person. His dark skin seemed to laugh at the sun as it beat down all 96 degrees.
        “I'm coming, let me tell Boston what the challenge is.” Brighton came running over to the plot of dirt where Xavier and Boston were standing.
        “Well Boston looks like you have quite the project going on here, three tomato plants not bad. Xavier told me your family has this process down to a tee. So we have decided to challenge you to a tomato growing competition. Best looking and tasting tomato wins.”
        Brighton started walking back to Xavier's truck to get their supplies. Xavier just smiled as Boston looked at him wondering if they were serious.
        “Let the games begin!” Yelled Boston at the back of Brighton.
        Xavier looked at Boston's plants and started to analyze his planting methods. Then we grabbed his shovel from Brighton who had returned and they started working putting in their own plants with their special fertilizer hand selected by Brighton.
        “So you two are seriously trying to beat my tomatoes? You know for generations my family has had this whole thing figured out, or at least that's what we all say.”
        “You may be the smartest one of us three Boston, responded Brighton, but we will get you on this one. And the rules are as follows. Number one, when it comes time to have these tried and scored for the goodness which they will be, a second party must choose the judges. Number two, of course you cannot sabotage the other planters tomatoes period. And number three, the two losers must present themselves before the tree in two months time since that is the next presenting.”
        Boston looked up the hole he was digging on his knees and said, “Why do you want to have the two losers present themselves to the tree?”
        Brighton looked at Xavier to see if he wanted to say anything then he said, “Oh come on Boston, nothing will happen anyway.”
        Xavier had been quietly listening to their conversation when he asked both of them, “Do you know why so many people come every six months to “present” themselves before the tree?”
        They both mumbled something which was a stall so they could try to remember something.
        “It all started with old man Henderson.”
        Just as Xavier started to explain the legend behind “the tree” Chelsea caught Boston's eye as she was walking by. Boston had always hoped to get to know Chelsea better and truthfully he wanted to ask her on a date. Chelsea kept walking by carrying her book bag and another book in her arms. She has just finish her classes, thought Boston, I wonder where she will be going for the summer break. As Chelsea walked by the tomato plants and the garden the three of them were putting in, her stopped and said, “Hey guys, finish your classes too?”
        Brighton quickly responded, “Oh, yes. Now I was just showing these two fine lads how to plant tomatoes.”
        Boston laughed, “Actually we are in a competition to see who can grow the best tomatoes. The two of us that loose have to present ourselves to the tree next week. Those apparently are the rules.”
        “I think everyone should present themselves to the tree at least once in their lifetime, just to see what happens. Nobody knows if the tree will respond or not so you might as well try. I was going to go next week and do that myself.”
        “I agree” voiced Brighton.
        Chelsea looked at Boston, “So I'll see you in about two months then?”
        Boston almost could not believe she was talking directly to him, wanting to know if she would see him next week. He almost didn't respond but got out something quickly, “Oh, yeah of course. I'll look for you there.”
        Boston watched Chelsea walk away and up the stairs to her apartment. Her room was right above Boston's, which he was grateful for since the entire complex had 50 rooms. Xavier and Brighton stayed in Boston's apartment so they knew more than anyone else that Boston was going to have a test of patience this next week until meeting up with Chelsea again. Normally the apartments house four people but Brighton was able to persuade the manager to letting them have only three.
        Boston dug the hole for his last tomato plant as Xavier and Brighton stood staring at him. Xavier spoke first, “You are one smooth fellow there Boston. All I'll say is your one luck man. Did you notice though, after we told her the rules she implied she would see you next week? I always knew Chelsea was smart. She knows I will be the winner of the competition and therefore you two fellows will be presenting yourselves before the great tree.”
        “All I know is my tomatoes will be awesome” said Boston.
        After all the tomato plants stood in the garden ready to absorb the photons of light and go through photosynthesis, the three of them went to the apartment and started packing for their home town. The drive was only 20 minutes from the university, but they all decided to stay in the apartments to get the true feeling that they had arrived at college. The city of wellington is comparatively small to other large cities, though it has many unique things about it. One of which is the great tree in Henderson park.
        After packing they all got into Xavier's truck and the diesel engine started up. Boston noticed as the truck pulled away that Chelsea's window curtain pulled back a bit allowing a view of them leaving for their hometown Chesterville just 20 minutes away. While driving Boston started thinking about what Xavier had mentioned about the great tree. He had never thought too much about the great tree other than what he had always seen since he could remember. People would come every six months on the dot. The people would be from all over the World he was told, and they would come days early. All the people or tourists as Mayor Tom Yeld would call them; were great for the cities business. Once the big day came people would line up and one by one and they would walk into Henderson park toward the great tree. The great tree was of course not the only tree in the park, but it was the one all the people would go up to. It looked just like all the other trees, though they were not like other trees. The Henderson park trees were quite different, one difference was in Boston's mind a big reason why so many people lived in the city Wellington. Once every month the leaves would fall off of all the trees. And these were larger trees, like the Redwoods but only in diameter. The height was not nearly as tall as Redwoods, they were around 50 yards or half a football field tall. Their branches were thick as well and would grow very long. The branches would bend left and right, grow up and down encircling almost all the trunk on the tree making it difficult to even touch the trunk and on some trees you couldn't see the trunk of the tree. Then you would add their leaves. The leaves were the main attraction to so many families in Wellington. About the size of an average bike tire, the leaves would grow large and have magnificent colors. Some trees had dark green leaves, and other trees had deep orange, or magenta, rose red, pure white like the great tree, and aqua blue. The colors alone induced a double take to all who passed the beautiful park, then the old, tall, very wide, large and branched trees would keep your attention. But the leave color was not most people's favorite part. Once every month, and over the course of two days; all the leaves would fall off. As the leaves fell through the air toward the earth they would start to group together. Then the leaves would pack closer together while they were still falling which would take some time alone from such a height as 50 yards as some leaves were, but since they were so large the fall seemed to be more of a slow float seemingly turning the air into water as the leaves sunk lower and lower. As this grouping of leaves continued to get closer they would form shapes and not just a circle but actual images of things. One of the favorite shapes is the Lion. The leaves would come together and form the shape of a Lion as they fell through the air. Other shapes would be of a bear, lizard, Drosophila melanogaster, and almost any animal imaginable. Hundreds of kids come to the park and run through the leaf shapes. As soon as the leaves are touched the shape explodes and the leaves hit the ground. The kids are running all over trying to get all the shapes before they hit the ground. Many parents are watching as their children are having the time of their lives, though many more parents are right there with their children running and jumping through the shapes of leaves. This event has drawn thousands of people to Wellington and was actually voted one of the best things to do in America by The travel bug magazine. Mayor Yeld always mentions the magazine article to people, he is very proud of Henderson park, and has organized small fun things to do around the park while the leaves are falling. One of the best things is all the food. This is one thing that is not in short supply. Hamburgers, hot dogs, steak, pork, salad, fruit, vegetables, and sweets, drinks, ice cream, burritos, pasta, rice, and more. The event seems to grow in size every month. Henderson park is a very large park with thousands of these unique trees. Though many people come, a family can find somewhere with-in the park where they can feel uncrowded. The entire park is well kept, grass everywhere you go, and no trash. This is all thanks, as Boston was remembering; to the Henderson family. The Henderson family was the clean up crew for the park, they are not actually direct family, this was just the name of the company. The clean up crew was almost never seen. Boston couldn't remember one time seeing them doing any sort of clean up. Most people haven't see the crew either. But people know they are doing their job because the park looked so great, and the company was registered with the city as the sole crew to do all the clean up services. This was checked many times by Mayor Yeld because he wanted to create a crew of his own for clean up, but since the Henderson family was in place the Mayor was never able to create his crew. Henderson park was next to Chesterville, Xavier would usually drive by the park on their way home and you could always see the great tree as you drive by. Boston could envision the people walking up to the great tree one by one. When it was your turn that person walked alone around a moderate hill up to the great tree while the others stood on the other side of the hill giving you your space. The great tree was one of Henderson park's tallest trees. It's leaves always grew white, but would fall like the rest of the leaves once every month. People loved trying to get the great tree leaves shapes of animals thinking it would bring good luck. Once the person arrived about five feet from the trees branches and trunk they would stop and present themselves to the tree. Boston thought, why would so many people do that, and how do you even present yourself to a tree anyway?
        “Hey Xavier, I was just thinking about what you said while we were planting those tomatoes, about this whole presenting thing. You were going to explain what it was right?”
        “What? I can't hear very well with this powerful engine humming away. Sorry, what did you say Boston?”
        Boston repeated himself.
        “Yeah, I'm surprised you two don't know the story, its legendary. So back in the day, some say 450 years ago, old man Henderson was actually living. He was Chesterville's mechanic and legend says he could fix or build anything. His business was very successful cars would come in from surrounding towns like Istell and even Bloom.”
        Brighton had to interrupt to assure himself he was hearing Xavier correctly, “Did you say people would come to Chesterville from Bloom our rival town?”
        “That's right. They would line up and wait to have Mr. Henderson work on their car. His mechanic shop was always well run. He had about thirty other people working for him, and cars would be done with almost any job within a day. Well as Mr. Henderson got older he would come to work less and less. At home he would work on his garden which was supposed to be amazing, apparently he has a very green thumb. One day Mr. Henderson went to the town bank where all his money was being saved. He withdrew almost every penny from that bank. People around town were scared when he did that thinking Mr. Henderson must be close to dying else why would he take all his money out? Other people got excited and tried to become his close friend so they could get some of his vast money. Rumors started going around town about what Mr. Henderson would be doing with the money. A group even got together to petition old man Henderson to donate most of his money to a charity, which they probably decided to do because over the years he had donated many times to various charities and had given large amount of money. But there at home old man Henderson sat not making any moves with his money until one day. He left home in his old age and bought about 700 acres of land and names the land Henderson park. People of course were past themselves as to why he would buy so much land, and in particular the land he bought. It was on the South end of town into the wilderness with nothing but bushes trees and some ponds. But Mr. Henderson would go out on his new land almost everyday with his wife and they would just walk around in there and talk. Then one day the Mr. Henderson and his wife took off on a trip. When asked where they were going they said, “To find the trees.” Once people heard about this adventure to find the trees, they thought the Henderson's had gotten too old for their own good and someone should have stopped them and taken them to a Doctor or something. So the Henderson's were gone for a long time, some people say it was a year and others say it was longer more like three years, regardless they were gone quite a while. Out of the blue though they did come back to Chesterville and they seemed different. People say it was like the Henderson's had something to tell them but didn't ever tell anyone. The Henderson's routine continued in town like usual. They got up in the morning and went right over to their property and would walk around, but this time they were planting something. Each day they would plant more and more. Rumors went around the town about what he was doing, some saying it was obvious, he had found the trees they went looking for. Others believed they found nothing but wanted to plant to make it seem as if they had been successful in finding these mysterious trees. Then old man Henderson gathered together a crew to help him out with his new park. He gathered about 150 people for the job as the park was so large needing much help. He found his crew fast with many willing hands to work for their pay. Every week he would have this crew working hard to get the park into top shape as they would plant grass, cut trees down, clear areas, pull weeds, and they would plant the Henderson's “special trees” as he called them. Once a week the Henderson's would have all the crew with their families come over to his home and property and there they would feast eating a grand meal. After the meal the Henderson's would teach their crew how to take care of the park, and in particular the “special trees.” What they taught is up for guessing since none of the crew members were allowed to tell anyone about Henderson park. So the workers worked and toiled for months and even years. As the park got better and better the crew would get new instruction on how to work. And by the way, the crew for the most part would stay with this job as long as they could because the Henderson's would pay them so well. So, as the park got into shape and the “special trees” started to grow, people noticed the crew weren't working as much. What happened was one night the Henderson's called a meeting with all the workers and their families, and told them what a good job they were doing, told them the superfluous things not to worry about with the park, then they told them about the special trees. He explain how they traveled for one year or three years, depending on who you believe; searching for the trees. He told them that the trees were extremely hard to come by and unique in every way. They had traveled to the glassy sands of Zuthiss where they finally found someone who knew where the trees were. He decided to be their guide and took them to the place where they trees were. Off they went on their camels into the sea of sand in a foreign country leaving the small village with the only water for miles. Zuthiss was well known years ago being one of the most watery places on Earth. That was until a terrible brought came and lasted until this day. Now the place is a desert with almost nothing growing, and that was how the Henderson's found the place, a desert, so many years ago. Well the guide took them across the hills of sand further and further away from the village. Then when they came over one of the sandy hills after having seen no water for miles there it was, the trees. The Henderson's told the crew and their families that hundreds of the trees were grouped together in a valley in the desert. The trees were in a thin film of water and were growing tall and wide. They also had leaves large like a bicycle tire full of color that varied from tree to tree. The trunk was very wide and the branches long and curvy almost covering the trunk so you couldn't see it. Yes, these were the trees they had been looking for and finally they have found them. The guide was proud to show the Henderson's this place since they payed him well. They went down the sandy hill and stepped onto the wet watery ground of soil. The Henderson's said the guide had explained how the trees had survived so long in this desert place, saying that when the land was full of live these trees showed up and started to grow. They colonized this valley and though the rains had stopped falling in Zuthiss, these trees have not only survived but have sustained all the people in Zuthiss. He explained to them that the trees will store large amount of water over time and as can be seen the trees will use that water in drought. They guide also pointed to a line of pipe and mentioned that was how his people had survived. The pipe was a water pipe leading from the trees and all the water there to the town where they had come from, but the water line going underground to prevent it from getting to hot in the desert sun so the pipe cannot be followed to the trees. The guide then told the Henderson's that the impressive amount of water the trees have is not the most miraculous thing about them. He guided them down into the trees and they walked around for some time looking at all the beautiful leaves and bright live of the area. Then Mr. Henderson stopped. He and his wife looked at the guide who only smiled and told them to be quite. They were very quiet and looked a second time at what they were seeing.”
        Boston listening to this entire story felt like he knew what the Henderson's were seeing though he couldn't put his finger on it, “So what did they see Xavier?”
         “I'm telling, I'm telling. So like I said the Henderson's were telling this entire story to their crew and families. So they were looking at this particular tree and couldn't believe what they were seeing. So quietly they got closer to get a more confirmed look to what they thought this was. On the tree they were looking at and through the tightly crossed over branches that were hanging down to block the view they could see a door. The door was more like a square than the rectangular doors we are used to, and the texture was just like the dark making its outline difficult to see. They was even a doorknob which looked more like a hole a person could grab onto and pull the door open. They could see the outline enough to see cracks where the door would open up.
        After the Henderson's told all of this to the crew they explained that all those trees they had been planting were from that valley near Zuthiss. They had gathered thousands of seeds from the trees and brought them back for planting here. Now that the trees are growing and much faster than any normal tree would grow; they knew the trees could be strong here in the park. The crew was in disbelief but since they heard the story from the Hendersons they thought it couldn't be a lie, the story was too real, it didn't seem made up, so the crew and most of the family members believe what was said. Then the Hendersons explained since the trees are planted and are growing strong, and since the park is almost done being almost all grass and clean and beautiful the services from the crew were now going to change. Instead of working in the normal hour range of the day or even a usual night shift, the workers were to come at unusual hours either in the night or the day and were to do their work then taking care of the trees and the park as a whole. The Hendersons said they have special plans for the trees when they mature and explained that the purposes would impact many. When the crew heard this there was consternation thinking they would get paid less and feeling unsure what they meant by the purpose of these mysterious trees. The Hendersons were intransigent to the pleas of the crew to rethink the whole thing and that they would work harder. After the initial roar died down, Mr. Henderson explained that the pay would be the same, and not just for them but for generation to come. He also explained that the trees purpose was not to be feared but to be looked forward to as glad things. And after sharing this with the crew the Hendersons welcomed all of them into the family as they considered them as family. That is when the company started, the Henderson family as the official park's maintenance crew. To this day the Henderson family company is keeping up the park, and as part of the job they have to work at the most unusual hours almost unseen by anyone. The Henderson's eventually died, Mr. Henderson first since he had the JEX disease though his wife died just days after that, they never did see the leaves develop on the trees. I wonder if they even knew about the leaves falling and making all those shapes like they do.
        Today rumors have gone all around town. Rumors like, “When the Hendersons found the trees they must have went inside and seen aliens”, “The Henderson family goes inside those tree doors at night” , “If you present yourself as the Hendersons did before a tree with all white leaves the tree will show you to a door on one of the trees.” These rumors have been around for years and years. Some people believe in the presenting thing, and others don't. Though every six months people come from all over the World to see if the great tree will respond to them, never has anyone found a door, at least not that they can prove to anyone else. There have been some people saying they were shown where a door is but when asked to find it again nobody can. Some others that say they have been shown a door won't even try to show anyone else saying the door was not for anyone else but them or that is wasn't the right time. Since people would go around the hill to the great tree alone, all the others are waiting unable to see the other person or what is happening. Sometimes when the person comes back they tell everyone or their family and friends what happened which is usually a good experience but no doors were shown, or the people won't tell anyone about seeing a tree door.”
        Boston was soaking all this in, and kept feeling that the story was not so novel to him but more familiar and real.
        “Well that was a great story, I can't believe you remembered all of that and in such good detail” said Brighton.
        “Trust me, its more than just a good story. And now that you know the background of the park you guys will remember it probably just as well as I do.”
        As Boston pondered Xavier’s expert history on the park, he thought about all the wonderful people who would come and enjoy the amazing leaves of the special trees.  Everyone loved to come and see them falling in the forms of different shapes of animals.  He remembered going with family and he would try running through as many leaves as possible.  One instance Boston remembered best was when he was eight or nine years old.  As Boston thought about this memory the voices of Brighton and Xavier blurred out from Boston’s ears.  The memory became that day just like the others before the falling of the leaves.  When they arrived at the park Boston could hardly wait to get out and start running through the leaves.  Aldo and Milly took Boston away from the masses of people so he could run unimpeded, and unworried of getting in other people’s way.  Boston took off running through patch of falling leaves after patch of falling leaves, down the beautiful grass he ran going farther into the park.  Aldo and Milly followed behind him enjoying watching Boston as much as seeing the leaves fall as carefully sculpted art.  Boston saw the most unique shape of an animal yet, he still could remember the shape they took, it was an elephant.  The leaves shaped the animal so perfectly it almost looked real to him.  Down the leaves fell and Boston got going full speed to run through them.  As he jumped into the air he felt a hard jerk on the back of his shirt.  It knocked him to the ground preventing him from touching any of the leaves.  Boston looked up to see what or who had caused this force.  Boston could remember seeing a man standing over him wearing a white lab coat.  The man shook his finger at Boston and told him to stay away from this area of the park, they were doing studies here.  Then the man looked quickly around as if he was trying to stay out of sight.  When Boston asked Aldo who that man was Aldo told him they were the scientists who are always at Henderson park studying the leaves.  The experience never left Boston, nor did the images of the man standing over him, the white lab coat, and the beautiful elephant the leaves had shaped.
        “Hey Xavier, do those scientists still come to the park and study the leaves and trees of Henderson park?”
        “You should know Boston that they do.  They come every year and stay for months.  Of course they try to stay out of sight of the public so nobody harasses them about their work, but yes they always come.”
“What is it they are studying?”
“Well the rumors are they are studying the leaves since we can’t figure out how they group together.  I think they are interested with the trees though because I have seen some of the scientists taking samples of the trees and putting it in their little boxes.”
“That’s strange we don’t know what it is they are doing out there, it’s our back yard.”
“Well whatever it is, the scientists haven’t found what they are looking for, I imagine; they keep coming back, and their numbers are growing little by little each and every year.  Major Yeld doesn’t mind them coming because they have to pay good money for every day out in the park.”






        Boston looked back out the window and saw his house. They had arrived back to their homes and Xavier was dropping him off first.
        Boston got out of the truck and grabbed his things. “Here’s ten dollars for gas.”
        “You know I never collect gas money from you guys though you offer every time.”
        “Yeah. Okay, thanks for the ride. I'll probably see you all tomorrow or sometime soon. I hope Linda. . . yeah she’s the manager; or someone else waters those tomato plants while we are gone.”
        Boston was about to run to his house and see all his family, but could see Xavier was looking a bit down, not his usual happy self.  
“Look Xavier, I know it’s hard going home and not having everyone there that should be there.  But at least you have everyone else.  They will be excited to see you.”
“Yeah.  This wont be mellifluous but I know he is still alive out there somewhere, though we’ve had zero contact with him.  I feel like one day he will contact us again, and honestly I feel like he will come back to my very house.  I just don’t know when, and I guess that’s the hard part.”
Xavier’s family has always been smart.  From his Dad and Mother, to their parents and beyond.  Xavier was no exception to this gift of intelligence, and neither was his older brother Bru.  At age nine, Bru published his first scientific paper.  Bru was followed by many high scientific communities wanting him to join their group and do research with them.  Ultimately when Bru was only seventeen Francis Hanson president of Price Science was able to persuaded Bru to join their ranks.  Price Science is still the leader in today’s science world.  Bru would work long hours with Price Science, then would come home on the weekends.  He was never fully open to all the details of their work, but said all the family would be benefited.  Xavier and Bru would do almost everything together.  They loved Henderson Park and would spend many hours there.  Over time Bru cut back on his visits home, until there were no more visits at all.  He would call Xavier and the family occasionally, but that soon ended as well.  Now neither Xavier nor his family have any contact with Bru.  The zero contact has lasted years.  In fact Boston can’t remember the last time he heard any update about Bru.  Xavier has recently been taking it much better almost to the point someone couldn’t tell he was missing a brother at all.  Xavier’s family isn’t the only ones in that situation.  There are at least seven other families Boston could remember in the exact same situation, some having had zero contact with their daughters and others like Xavier’s family, having had zero contact with their sons.  It was the one thing Boston left unease with about Chesterville.  It had the town feel incomplete, un-unified and unwhole.  Notwithstanding the lack of any contact from those daughters and sons at Price Science, all families felt they would see their children again. 
“I think Bru will return too.  Price Science can’t hold him forever.”
        Boston walked up to his house which was a nice home, but not over the top. Aldo and Milly, Boston's parents decided when they built the house that they wanted to have more money to go on vacations with their family than to have a mansion of a home. Though the house was two stories and had nice decor inside so overall the house was in very good shape. One of the best rooms was where Boston's sister stayed, bedridden. Lilly was one of the best people to have a conversation with. She was so good to be positive having a bright outlook on life and anyone's goals or good desires. Lilly was someone you could share your burdens with and she would help you to feel better and have hope looking forward. Xavier would often visit with her, reading scriptures to her from the Bible and Book of Mormon. She had thousands of cards from the people of Chesterville and Wellington, as well as the Doctors and staff at the Wellington hospital where Aldo worked as a Physician Assistant. Aldo was always looking for the cure to help Lilly and the rest of the people who were infected. He had tried almost all methods and medicines to help Lilly but so far none have been able to make a significant difference.
        Boston walked through the door and instantly smelled his Mom's cooking which was a town favorite. Milly would always have something cooking that she could either take care of her family with or deliver the meal to a family who was needing some food. Boston loved when the food would go to someone in need, but especially liked when it would stay home so he could get nice and full as well. This meal looked like it was staying home. Milly was a stay at home Mother. She did receive some persecution from people from time to time about how she was so smart and should be working doing something. She would kindly tell them that she is doing something of which requires all her intellect and skill, raising her children and teaching them right. Boston was always grateful she made that choice. He remembers her help not only in his research while he was at home, but the advise she would give to him guiding him to do the right thing. Aldo being a Physician Assistant allowed Milly to stay at home and make these lasting impacts for good on their children. Aldo loved coming home after the work day to do fun things with the family. They would go on a lot of adventures traveling to many different countries and seeing new and fun things. When Lilly got sick Milly's presence was that much more needed to help her and give her comfort.
        “Welcome home!” Boston somehow knew his Mom would sense him at the doorway the instant he walked through.
        “Good to be home. How is everyone?”
        “Great great. Dads outside finishing planting tomatoes as you may have guessed. Will you get the door?”
        “The front door, nobody knocked?” Just then a knock came at the door. Boston never knew how his Mom was able to do that, she always knew when someone was about to knock.
        “Yeah, I'll get it.”
        Boston walked over to the door and noticed on their side table just before the door a stack of letters with his name on them. There must have been ten or twelve letters. He picked just one up to get a better look, but heard the door again.
        “Boston, would you please get that?”
        Boston turned the doorknob and opened the door to see two men standing there in white lab coats. One was a bit taller than the other and has a white beard, other than that they looked about the same, being both about the age of sixty. They even had on name badges, the taller one was Fred and the other was named Francis.
        “Hello, can I help you?”
        Francis the shorter one extended his hand to shake Boston's and said, “It's good to meet you Boston, we have heard good things about you. My name is Francis as you probably have already observed from my name badge. This is Fred who works with me. Could we come in to talk to you for a few minutes?”
        Boston’s mind was racing.  Immediately thoughts were flooding in about the missing people from town, how they go to Price Science then nobody would have contact with that person again.  Boston wanted to attack this man for the evil his company was causing, or at least induced, but reframed remembering that many people in town thought those who go to Price Science love it so much they don’t want to leave or talk to anyone outside of the Price Science community.  Boston always believed if he were to go to Price Science he would maintain constant contact with his family, if he ever would go there.
 “How do you know my name? Have you seen some of my research at Wellington College or something? And actually I just got home from there and was hoping to visit with my family first. Can I call you and meet up another time?”
        Fred looked at Francis as if he was about to pounce on Boston and kidnap him. Francis seeing Fred's expression let out an awkward laugh and nodded his head no. “That would be just fine.”
        The two started to walk away from the door. Boston was confused with how easily they decided to leave, and after such a short conversation. “I didn't get your number” Boston yelled out to them.
        Francis barely turned his back around to yell back. “You already have it. Look at the letters.”
        That answer sent something zinging throughout Boston's body like a hurried damp cloud, which he had not felt in a lot time. He was frozen stiff, immovable in the 90 degree heat standing on the doormat looking out into the midst of the evening. He retrieved just one thought, the letters. He had remembered the stack of letter on the side table, addressed to him. Now he knew who sent the parchment, but why?
        “Who was that?” Milly's voice pulled Boston from the immersed labyrinth of his pondering mind and pinch of fright.
        Without saying a word Boston shut the door and walked over to the letters. He grabbed ever one of the letters and sat down on their couch. He took the top letter and started to open it. The letter read,
                Dear Boston Childs,


        We are honored to contact you about this wonderful opportunity. The Society of Life has         recently come to a knowledge of your scholarly achievements and would like to invite you to         our conference in June. There we will talk more and introduce ourselves formally. We         were         impressed by you and would like you to join us in our scientific endeavors. Please come by for         the conference at Wellington College.
        
        Sincerely,
        President Johnson, Founder of The Society of Life


        The society sounded familiar to Boston, but he had never spoken to anyone from the group nor was he aware of anyone looking at his work at Wellington College. This seemed very unusual. He opened another letter,


        Dear Boston Childs,


        Due to your unique qualities and excellent in school we – Price Science would like to invite you         to our circle this June. Join us Boston and together we can achieve great advances and help         many individuals.


        Sincerely,
        Francis D. Hanson


        There he was, Francis. Surely not all these letters could be invitations to join a group of scientists, thought Boston. One by one he went through the letters reading to discover almost the same message. His research this year was unsuccessful, why had all these prestigious groups of scientists contacted him? Price Science was by far the best group. Each year they would obtain the best minds from around the globe. The top students from Wellington College would go their no questions asked. They have the most expensive equipment, and top of the line facilities. This group was moving mountains in the science world and they only took the best. Now that there was time to think clearly, Boston did remember hearing that name before. Francis was the acting president of Price Science.
        Thinking out loud Boston mumbled to himself, Why me? Why did the Francis, the acting president of Price Science come to my house and ask to come in? Why did I not invite him in!
        “Looks like you found your letters.”
        “Hey Dad.” Boston immediately got up and hugged his Dad. “Yeah, all of these are invitations to join their group or at least to talk with them at the next conference which for most of them are in June. Dad, you know my research this year was a failure. What is going on, why would ten leading groups of scientist want to collectively and suddenly try to recruit me to “join them? I know I should always to confident as you have always told me, but don't you think this is a little strange?”
        “Ten groups have written you!” Aldo turned his head toward the kitchen and put this hands to his mouth to enhance his voice. “Milly, can you come to the living room?”
        Milly walked around the corner. “Hey my two favorite men. What's going on?”
        “Boston just opened those letters that had come for him. They were from ten of the top groups of scientists from all over, even Price Science sent a letter. They all want him to join their group, or like he was just saying they at least want to meet with him and soon, but we need to be careful about that Price Science group.  We don’t want to lose our contact with you if you go there.”
        Just as Boston was about to say he felt this was out of place, like something was missing from the letters; when he heard a terrible thud from the upstairs. All three of them looked up. Lilly's room was directly above them. Boston thought he saw his Dad and Mom levitate to their feet and fly up the stairs to the second floor of the house. They were so fast to react it seemed the sound waves carried in them the instructions of act and act fast. Boston hurried after them up the stairs and with each step closer to the top he felt a terrible ominous feeling. At the top of the stairs Boston stopped and looked at the closed door to Lilly's room. Aldo and Milly were already inside. Boston stepped nearer to the door and cracked it open. Lilly was on the floor, she had fallen out of her bed.
        “Stay with us Lilly, stay with us!” Milly was holding her head, while Aldo was frantically getting medical supplies from Lilly's room. Milly kept talking to Lilly. “You will be okay. Stay with us.” “Aldo we are loosing her, she has stopped breathing.”
        Aldo dropped everything and dropping to his knees by Lilly started CPR. Boston grabbed Lilly's feet to hold her even more stable. Aldo kept performing CPR seconds went by. Lilly was motionless. She was not responding. Minutes went by. Milly was not crying, looking deeply at Lilly hoping she was come back. Lilly still lay motionless on the floor by her bed. Milly got to her phone and called for an ambulance, though they all knew if Aldo couldn't save her now, she would be dead. More minutes went by, then Aldo finally stopped. When Boston saw his Dad stop he knew that Lilly was gone and would not be coming back. They all sat on the floor by Lilly crying and in disbelief.
Milly was getting hysterical crying and was shouting, “What happened!” Aldo was holding her on one side and Boston on the other side. They stayed there for seven more minutes then the ambulance arrived. The helpers rushed in and tried everything they could to help save her, but it was too late and Boston knew it. JEX had claimed yet another life, this time is was his sister just 24 years old, three years older than Boston.
        A few days later the funeral was held for Lilly. By then the news had gotten out to Chesterville what happened so there were hundreds of people at the Church house where the viewing and services were held. Aldo, and Milly spoke first. Boston was the last speaker.
        “She died so suddenly. I had just gotten home for the summer and didn't even see Lilly before she died. I would have liked to talk to her one last time. We all knew her time was close since she had JEX, though we all thought she would outlast old man Henderson's record of four years with the disease.
        Lilly was gifted. She was always lightening burdens for people, but as people would tell you, she didn't take to burden away rather she would help strengthen you and the burden felt lighter. I remember sitting and talking with her last year asking her how she was able to do that. She told me about my good friend Xavier who would come read scriptures with her from the Bible, the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. They would read together for hours. She told me that learning about Jesus Christ and how He was able to strengthen everyone that came to Him was so powerful for her and strengthened her so much that when someone would come to her for some support she would simply tell them about Jesus Christ.
        Lilly was also able to maintain a positive outlook. Two years she was stuck in bed. Her energy was focusing on fighting the infection, yet somehow with all that time alone she was able to practice virtue and keep good thoughts. I was always impressed by that.
        One of my favorite memories of Lilly was when we were just kids. My parents took us camping in a tent up Holdum Mountain. It was just the four of us and we had a blast. To those of you here today that do not know, Holdum Mountain has been known to have some snakes. One of our friends told Lilly about the snakes just before we went camping, so she was a little paranoid. Well while our parents were cooking dinner over the fire for us, Lilly and I went looking for more wood. I had just found a good pile of wood we could gather up and called Lilly over to help me. When she came over I heard she scream. Just as I was looking over my shoulder to see what happened I felt her tackle me hard to the ground then we both got up and ran back to camp. While I was running I notice my hand landed on a shard stick when Lilly tackled me and was bleeding. When we got back to camp we could barely breath but our parents were so scared they forced us to calm down and tell them what happened. Lilly finally told them that she had seen a snake right by my feet and had to get me out of there. Once we all calmed down, all of us went back to where Lilly had seen the snake, my Dad brought his shotgun since we didn't want to have another run in with the snake later tonight. We all got to the spot where Lilly had seen the snake and Lilly again gave a loud scream pointing just ahead of us yelling that it was still there. Oh Dad gathered us all behind him and raised up his shotgun to shoot as he walked slowly toward the snake to get into good range. We all waited for the shot, but it never came. I remember watching my Dad get closer and closer then it looked like he was standing right next to the snake. He leaned over and picked it up! The he started walking back toward us. Lilly was screaming again for Dad to stop, and kill the snake. When he got to us we all could see the snake he was holding was really just a very deceptive snake looking piece of wood. My Dad also told me he saw the blood near the snake looking piece of wood where we had fallen. This is my favorite memory of Lilly because she sincerely thought that piece of wood was a man killing snake coming to get me. Then she saved my life, though tackling me to the ground right by the snake was probably not the best move, but like I said we were kids. This was the kind of person she was. I will miss her.”
        After the Church services most all the people followed Boston and his family to the cemetery where they lowered Lilly into the ground. Boston had so many thoughts in his mind. He thought about his great sister, he thought about how his parents were holding up, he thought about a lot. Once Lilly was completely in and people started to leave Boston took a look around noticing for the first time just how many people came come to say goodbye to Lilly.  He noticed for the first time a feeling growing inside that he was not included with those family who have lost contact with their children as they went off to Price Science.  He now knew, maybe a bit too much, how they felt and how they wanted to see their children-siblings again.  
As Boston was observing all the people he looked by one of the trees the cemetery had. There standing by it was Francis, one of the scientists who had come to visit him. Francis was not moving one muscle, he was just looking directly at Boston. Immediately Boston started momentum toward Francis. Again Francis did not move a muscle. Boston increased his walking trying to get to him and fast. Then as Boston got about halfway Francis turned and went behind the tree into the crowd of people and was gone.
        The Childs family got home from the funeral. Boston felt like going on a walk alone. He walked through the streets of Chesterville wandering at random down the roads. He decided to walk along Henderson Park since a long road went along the park's border. Further and further he went feeling like gravity was increasing and it was harder to keep walking. What was going on? How did all this happen? Boston's thoughts swept him completely away from any cognoscente of where he was or what he was doing. He heard a quiet voice come from the park, but since the sun was set and the night well rested in Boston could hardly see a person to put the voice to. “Who's there?”
        “It's me Brighton. Stop walking and tie your shoe or something. Listen, you're being watched and not by just me. I have been trying to find you so I could tell you but I didn't want to be seen. Look to your right across the street outside Louie's Restaurant. See that man standing there alone with the red ball cap on and the camera around his neck? He is following you.”
        “Yeah I saw him. It this for real, or are you messing with me? Now is not a good to joke with me as you know.”
        “No! Seriously, Boston you have to come to my house, don't go back home tonight. We will tell your parents where you are when we get there. I need to show you something.”
        “I'm standing up.”
        “Okay, now run to my house with me. Come into the park for cover. Hurry.”
        “Go!”
         Boston ran into the park and together with Brighton started to sprint toward Brighton's home which was about 2 miles from there. As they started to run Boston looked back and couldn't see the man with the camera anymore. Boston immediately started to run faster feeling the adrenaline serge through his body. Brighton must have been feeling the same since he was just behind of Boston. They ran for what seemed like to them hours. They popped out of the park after some time and started running across the road and down an alley way. From here Brighton lead because he knew all the back ways to his house. At this point neither of them wanted to look back and see if that man was following. Somewhere inside, Boston felt there was no humanly way anyone could run as fast as them. Down the alley they went then left down another street, then inside the back door of a store. They hurried up stairs to the second floor then they heard the same back door crash open.
        “That's the guy Brighton, hurry up!”
        They passed the second floor planning to go to the next flight of stairs leading to the roof, but Brighton stopped suddenly and pointed to go back down. Boston felt it would be impossible to get him to go back that way, like telling a horse to suddenly fly. But as Brighton ran past him he put his finger to his lips to signal silence and down they both went to the second floor. On the second floor of the store were multiple rooms for the store owners to put all their things. They found the first door in reach and tried to go inside, but the door was locked. They both could hear the hurried feet of the man coming up the stairs. He was nearly to the second floor. Brighton tried another door, this one was locked as well. Now Boston started to feel panic, there were more doors but no time. The man had reached the second floor.
        Brighton and Boston stood there in plain sight. No use trying to hide, they had run and couldn't shake guy so why try to hide now. The man came up the steps and looked right through the second floor doorway. Then as if Brighton and Boston had become invisible, the man kept running up the stairs.
        Boston turned his tense neck to look at Brighton. “Did he not see us?”
        “No idea. We need to find a door that's unlocked and fast. My house is only two blocks from here.”
        They split up trying the other doors and found several unlocked. Brighton checked inside and kept saying, “No, not this one. We need a window to let us outside.”
        “Yeah, this room here has a window. Brighton come on I found one.”
        In the room they went shutting and locking the door behind them. Brighton opened the window and paused.
        “Do you hear anything?”
        “You tell me, your the one closer to the window.”
        “I don't hear a thing. He must be looking for us on the roof.”
        “How far did you say your house was from here?”
        “Look you can see it there, two blocks away. We grew up here, you should know where my house is.
        “I know, I just have been thinking about other things. So are we going up or down from here?”
        “Just hang on a second, I want to know where this guy is. I don't want to lead him to my house.”
        “Good point. I hope you know the owner of this store.”
        “Yeah I do, I can tell him all that happened tomorrow. Hey, look there's the guy. He made it to the road already. He is a quick mover. Okay, luckily he went the opposite direction of my house. Let's go now before he comes back this way.”
        Boston and Brighton climbed out the window and with a bit of a jump grabbed the edge of the roof to pull themselves up. Once on the roof they ran across to the other edge and jumped to the next building. They ran across the roof to the door entrance and tried to open the door. It was locked. Almost without thinking, Boston went to the edge of the building and started to maneuver down. Brighton followed him. They got to the first window ledge then the second which was really the first floor's window. Once on the ground they went by foot the rest of the way to Brighton's house. Brighton took one last look around before going in to make sure they were clear from the man following them. They had it in and with no trace of the guy.
        “I need to call my parents and tell them what's going on. They need to keep an eye out just in case this guy tries to find me at my actual house.”
        “Yeah call them, also tell them you're staying here tonight. There is no way we should try to leave tonight.”
        “Hello, Mom? It's Boston, I'm just full of adrenaline so my voice sounds funny. Listen, you and Dad need to be careful tonight. Brighton and I were just chased by some guy I have never seen before. I'm afraid he might try to find me back at home, so be careful. No, I don't know what's happening, it's so strange. I'm going to stay at Brighton's house tonight so we don't have to leave again. Yeah, okay, Love you both. Bye.”
        Boston hung up the phone and had a feeling the chase was over tonight. “How did you find me Brighton?”
        “It wasn't easy, but I figured you would be by the park since that is where you usually end up when you go for those random walks.”
        “I'm lucky you know that. This is so strange, I don't understand. Who am I to get followed?”
        “Hey sorry about Lilly. I don't know if you noticed but for some reason Francis Hanson from Price Science came to the funeral. I know what he looks like since I want to work for those guys, but anyway I kept watching him. Just before everyone started to leave the cemetery I notice d Francis talking to some guy and he kept pointing toward you. After the services were all done Francis took off and drove away, but the guy he was talking to stayed. I started following him that day and Boston the guy was following you. He would take a lot of photos of you too, I don't know why. But, that was the same guy following us tonight. Since this guy had a camera I thought I would bring a video camera to up him one and film what he was filming. Plus I wanted to prove to you this was a real.
        Brighton went to get the video camera, but as Boston was talking this all in it became a little too much. He felt so tired and wanted nothing else but to sleep for tonight. He would eventually tell Brighton about Francis visiting his house. Whatever Brighton have on video it would have to wait until tomorrow.
        “Brighton, wait. I'm drained. I'm just going to go to sleep for now. Let's watch the video tomorrow. Sorry, I just need to calm down from everything.”
        “Boston you have to see this video.”
        “Tomorrow. And thank you for helping me out.”
        That morning Boston opened his eyes to the sun already up and the day bright slowly progressing along He looked at the clock which read 9:48 am. He could smell a delicious breakfast cooking downstairs. He noticed Brighton was not in the room, so he got dressed and went downstairs toward the aroma of bacon and eggs, toast and orange juice.
        “Well, good morning Boston. I thought I would just let you sleep since you had so much on your mind. My Mom has already been up as you can see from all the food. My parents are both gone for a Saturday drive, I told them I would stay behind with you. Hope you slept well.”
        “Like a rock.”
        “Yeah you were out quick and deep. I stayed up for a while watching out the window for that guy, but luckily I never saw him.”
        “Thanks again for your help, you can have my bacon as a Thanksgiving.”
        “I've already eaten, thanks.”
        “Sure. So after I eat do you want to come with me to see my parents. I hope they are fine and didn't have any problems last night.”
        “You bet. After spending forever trying to find you last night, I'll keep hanging around. You never know what can happen.”
        Boston was eating his filling breakfast while Brighton kept talking to him. The more he ate the more he realized this meal was needed. He could almost feel the glucose molecules begin converted into pyruvic acid, the Krebs cycle turning, and the electron transport chain going. His brain was happy to get that glucose. Brighton would put a dish in the sink every so often while Boston sat at the island bar eating. Boston could see out the kitchen window above the sink wondering how his parents were doing and if they even slept last night. Boston took a big gulp of his medium pulp orange juice and looked back out the kitchen window. Boston froze at what he saw and wanted to explode running but somehow stayed put exactly where he was and knew he had to communicate to Brighton who was still talking to him with his back to the window.
        “Brighton, in all seriousness do not turn around.”
        Brighton stopped talking and said a simple, “Okay.”
        “Standing about thirty yards from your kitchen window is that man from last night. He is just standing there looking right at us. He is not moving at all.”
        “What do we do, what do we do now.”
        Brighton started to show the signs of panic. “Don't panic, hold it together, he is not moving remember?” Brighton started to calm a little. They both sat in the kitchen in the same positions for what seemed to them as forty minutes but only seconds ticked by.
        “Now what's he doing?”
        “Nothing.... wait he just looked to his right.”
        Just as Boston saw the man turn his head they both heard a shotgun go off. A tree next to the man received most of the small metal balls from the shotgun bullet. The man looked stunned but unharmed by the shot. He took off running into the trees and over Brighton's back fence. The man was gone.
        “Who was that!” Now Brighton turned around, and seeing the man run away he opened the back door of the house and stepped outside. Boston followed him directly and they saw the person who had shot the shotgun. It was Aldo, and Milly was right next to him.
        “Are you two alright?” Milly yelled the question so loud she nearly lost her voice in that one sentence. She ran over to them and gave them both a huge.
        “Yes Mom we are both fine. We had just seen that man a few minutes before you scared him away.” Aldo came running over and also gave them both a hug. “I'm sure you were aiming for that tree right Dad.”
        “Well I needed to get his attention. It would have been better to have him here for questions but he is long gone by now.”
        Boston took a good look at his parents. “I'm glad you two are alright. I was nervous that guy would try coming to the house looking for me.”
        “We were prepared, but nobody ever came by. Milly and I got little sleep taking turns watching and listening for anyone trying to break in.”        
        Brighton was now calm enough to talk. “Last night I found Boston walking by the park and just in time too. That guy had been following Boston for quite some time yesterday getting closer and closer. He always had a camera with him, but I didn't understand why until I thought to bring a video recorder with me. I got some things on the video that you all need to see.”
        Brighton left and went to his room to get the video camera.
        “We are so happy you're alright. I was so scared last night thinking we should have come to Brighton's house the moment you called, but as Aldo said, it wouldn't have been smart. That guy would have been watching us and hoping we would lead him right to where you were, so we stayed put. It was so hard though, and stressful. Boston do you know what is going on?”
        “No idea Mom.”
        Brighton came back with the video and connected it to his laptop. The video came up showing the man walking down the road. “Since I didn't know where you were Boston I started filming this guy because I knew he was close to you.” The video searched the roads for Boston but it never showed him, only the mysterious guy could be stopped. Minutes went by and the night became darker. Then on the video the man hurried his walk stopping by the restaurant where Boston had stopped him. “So he stays at the restaurant for a while then here comes Boston walking by the park edge. I was hiding in the park and couldn't believe Boston was about to walk right by me.” The video now showed Boston walking. As Boston watched the video he thought about how down he looked. It was a sad lonely walk and Boston could see within himself the pondering of deep questions in his mind. Brighton paused the video. “Now this next part is what I wanted to show you all above all else, and when I saw it myself I knew this is why Boston was being followed.” The video started to zoom in slowly. It showed Boston walking closer, then the video was getting cut off by something passing by the lens. It wasn't just one solitary object there were many of them and they were moving quick. They are Boston passed under a street lamp they could see what was happening. The objects were leaves, and they were assembling behind Boston. The leaves gathered together about twenty-five strong and started to float off the ground following Boston as he walked. The leaves were multiple colors that could be seen easily as blue, yellow, and white leaves. The moment Boston saw the leaves and their color accompanied by their large size he knew which leaves their were.
        “Those are the leaves of Henderson's trees.”
        “Exactly right Boston.”
        The video played on showing eventually the ground as they could hear Brighton whisper out to Boston telling him about the man across the street. Brighton stopped the video.
        “Boston, those leaves moved and were floating behind you like a cape or something moving along with you as you walked. Now I know when those leaves fall they can make shapes which nobody can explain but this is another level.”
        Aldo had his hand over his mouth with a look of true amazement on his face. “I have never seen or heard anything like this. I don't know how to explain it.”
        “Neither do I, but I have a feeling this is why that guy was following Boston.”
        Boston and his parent got into their car and drove back home. Boston went into his room and laid down trying to take a rest, but couldn't sleep or rest his mind at all. He decided to call Xavier.
        “Hey my friend do you have a few minutes to talk?”
        “Sure, what's going on? And sorry about Lilly, really it would be tough.”
        Boston went on to tell Xavier the entire night's events coupled with seeing the guy this morning and then Boston told him about the video. Xavier listened carefully waiting to get all the detailed before saying a word.
        “So Boston, why did you run from this guy? Why didn't you just go over and ask him what he wanted?”
        Boston was so shocked by Xavier's response he stayed silent trying to come up with a response.
        “Not saying I wouldn't of run myself, but looking back it may have been your best option to just go talk to him in public. Now he has been shot at, and knows where Brighton lives. Again I probably would have run, but I wonder what would have happened if you two talked across the street and talked to the guy.”
        “Well Brighton gave me a good scare there in the bushes of the park and pointing out people following me. So when he suggested we run, I didn't argue. Though you make a good point. At least I would know what he wanted. This is why I call you Xavier, you have good advice. I hope it's good advice because I'm sure this guy didn't leave town and I feel like I'll seen him again soon.”
        “Well be careful, but if you come across him try talking then if you have to run, then run.”
        They hung up the phone and Boston decided to fall asleep.
        The Sun rose high and bright welcoming in the morning to start the new day and it was normal which gave Boston a loving feeling for the day. Boston went to Church with Xavier as he usually did. He liked going to Church with Xavier especially today as they talked about when Christ was resurrected. He thought about seeing Lilly again and looked forward to that happy day.
        Back at home all was quiet as Aldo, Milly and Boston talked. Boston told them about Chelsea who he met at Wellington College just this year. How she had hoped to see him at the presenting in July. Milly and Aldo smiled as they listened to their son talk about what sounded to them like his future girlfriend. They were talking in the living room of the house. Aldo had designed the home putting in his own artistic touch, but nothing was approved until both Milly and Aldo agreed on the designs. Aldo had the living room open so you could see the second floor of the house with the doors to various rooms. Lilly's room was down one of the halls. The second floor had a guard rail around the walkway preventing the accidental slip and fall to the first floor. At the fall wall from the kitchen Aldo had a bookshelf constructed. This bookshelf extended from the first floor to the second. To get one of the hundreds of books that lay on its sturdy shelves you had to go up various spiral staircases that were on the sides of the bookshelf. Every seven feet one of the shelves extended out about three feet so you could walk across to the other side and up another spiral staircase. Aldo was always proud of the creation and it was well used. Milly was the one who made Aldo's creations work. She would decorate and arrange things to give the creations life and make the whole of it a home. They were the perfect pair.
        “So, Boston tell us more about this Chelsea.” Milly always liked to her about Boston's love life.
        “Mom, you're always interested aren't you. Yes, Chelsea is very beautiful and she actually spoke to me when Xavier, Brighton, and I were putting in the tomato plants. I hope those plants are being watered. And like I said she wanted to meet up at the presenting at Henderson park. Though for the next two months I won't see her. I don't even know where she is from or where she went for summer. All I know is she will be here in July. That's one benefit of living next to these magical trees, you get to have people meet you in your home town.”
        “She sounds nice and interested. You are going to meet her at the presenting right?”
        “Of course, of course. Hope I can find her there.”
        The next morning Boston wanted to meet up with Xavier and go do something to get his mind off all the past events. We left home after a good breakfast and started walking to Xavier's house. Along the way Boston made sure to stay in public and go by the highest traffic areas.
        Boston walked by a dinner that was relatively close to his house. The dinner was a familiar site, a place he had been many times with family and friends. They had great food and would give you lots of it for a good price. The Johnson family owned the dinner and have for years. Sam Johnson the Dad decided to quit his old job as a truck driver and start this business. At first the family was hesitant to go along with the idea, but eventually thought it would be worth a shot since this would allow them to see Sam more often. His old trucking routes would take him away from home sometimes for one to two months at a time. The word spread that Sam was starting the Dinner and the local people of Chesterville started pitching in helping Sam clean up the building and construct a great Dinner. Sam was so impressed by the kindness of the people and their willingness to help, he named the Dinner The Heart of Chesterville. Sam was always grateful and the Dinner has been successful ever since. Sam and the Johnson family seemed happy whenever you saw them, they were good people. As Boston was walking by The Heart of Chesterville he looked through the windows at all the people already inside ordering a late breakfast or an early lunch. His eyes came to a woman about his age who was absolutely beautiful. She seemed very familiar to Boston as he gave his synapses a workout trying to remember where he had seen this woman. It came to him. There in The Heart of Chesterville was Chelsea. Without self consciousness of selected action Boston's heart started to race a little as his autonomic nervous system took over and his sympathetic nervous system sent out EPSP signals to increase his heart rate. Why had she come to Chesterville so early before the presenting? Did she have family here, perhaps friends who live here? Boston automatically started walking toward the Dinner door and went inside. Chelsea was sitting at the counter eating with from what Boston could tell some of her friends. They were laughing and having fun. Boston approached the counter.
        “Chelsea? It is you, this is amazing. How are you?”
        “Hello Boston, yes it is really me in the flesh. I'm doing great, loving this town. You should try some food here, it's really good.”
        “That's true. I have eaten here many times since this is my hometown. Actually Xavier, Brighton, and I all grew up here.”
        “Really! What a great town this is with Henderson Park and all. Sorry, these are my friends who live in town, Rebecca and Latisha. Rebecca and Latisha, Boston.”
        Boston had been so focused on talking to Chelsea that he hadn't noticed who the friends were. After being introduced to them by Chelsea he realized that he knew both of them. They both were a few years younger than Chelsea and Boston but he remembered from school in Chesterville, and they both were very nice people so Boston felt the parasympathetic nervous system kick on helping him feel more relaxed.
        “Good to see you two again. Hope you're telling Chelsea all the good things about me. We know each other from school, they are great friends I am sure of it. So, you have come early for the presenting.”
        “Yeah. I wanted to see both Rebecca and Latisha for a while before, plus I did overhear that you were from this town so I thought I could come and make sure you were going to follow through with the presenting.”
        “Well since your here I should show you around the town a little more, unless Rebecca and Latisha already had today all planned out maybe I could steal you away for a few hours.”
        Boston looked over at Rebecca and Latisha who both were trying to hide their giggles.
        “That sounds wonderful to me, just stop by Latisha's house where I'm staying after dinner and you can show me your favorite places in town.”
        “Okay, see you them.”
        Boston turned to go back out the door when he felt someone grab his hand. He looked back to see Chelsea was holding onto his hand with a smile.
        “In case you get lost.”
        Boston smiled, and walked out of the Dinner. He opened his hand and saw the paper Chelsea had put inside. It was her phone number. Boston was so happy to see that, he felt like a sudden cloud descended from the sky and was carrying him down the road to Xavier's house. Then he saw the rest of the note, Boston don't look but there is a man following you, I don't know why. Be careful. Almost intently Boston's floating cloud disintegrated and his senses heightened. Boston knew he must stay in public and always do what Chelsea said, be careful.
        Boston arrived at Xavier's house and knocked on the door. Xavier opened almost immediately and told him to come in. Xavier's Dad Ray was very good friends with Aldo and they had designed their homes together putting in all the unique touches they had hoped for in their homes. The actual designs were not approved until both Milly and Xavier's Mom Ketly had given go ahead.
        “This is a beautiful day Boston don't you think?”
        “Oh yeah it's great, actually it's wonderful and spectacular! This may be the best day of my life!”
        “Now that's a positive outlook. What happened?”
        “I saw Chelsea! She is actually staying here with Latisha and knows Rebecca too. They were eating at The Heart of Chesterville. She gave me her number and we set up a time to meet tonight so I can show her some of the town.”
        “Now that is good timing to catch her in the Dinner.”
        “Life is great. And on that note with her number, she wrote that someone was following me and to be careful. We knew that guy was likely going to be back, so I was staying in public places but I haven't seen him at all today. Chelsea spotted him though, and could tell he was following me. How did she do that?”
        “Really? That's impressive. I have no idea how she was able to do that, but it seems like this guy is being less careful about concealing himself. Did you decide to talk to him?”
        “Well, yes but I am not going to search him out. I'll continue my normal life trying to stay in public, and if he decides to find me I'll try to stay calm and talk to him.”
        “It will be interesting to see what he has to say. Anyway, I need your help.”
        “Sure, what do you need?”
        “So you know I have been wanting to ask Chelsea out on a date, and I ask you, how do you know that?”
        “You told me, probably sixty three times.”
        “Right, I told you because I have wanted to ask her for a long time now and I talk about her to my friends. Well at The Heart of Chesterville Chelsea was there with Rebecca and Latisha who are her friends. I was going to see if you could go talk to them and investigate for me. See if Chelsea has mentioned me to them before.”
        “You must be nervous my friend, but okay I'll do some investigation since I too know those girls so this won't be difficult I hope.”
        “You're the greatest Xavier, I'm meeting Chelsea after dinner so you have just about two hours, good luck. You can call me at my house and let me know your discoveries.”
        Boston left Xavier's house a lot quicker than he had originally planned but he also didn't know that Chelsea would be in town. Boston walked slowly taking his time on the journey back home. He wanted plenty of time to think about what they would be doing tonight and where he could take her showing her the great town of Chesterville. Boston's walk took him past The Heart of Chesterville and past many small stores. His mind drifted more and more into pre-date preparation as his route home drifted into less populated roads leading home. The Sun was starting to set now and the beautiful colors were appearing in the distant sky. The clouds acted as hyperthermic campers grabbing every ray of sunshine as if it was a ray of fire to warm them longer and longer until the dark of night would deplete any warmth. As Boston turned down a familiar road just blocks from his house, the roads composition under his shoes registered the thought of dirt. This was a dirt road, Boston thought to himself and then realized he had been taking the back way home. Boston started to pick up his pace knowing that being in this unpopulated area was putting himself at risk of being captured by this guy who had been following him. Boston again increased his pace, faster and faster. He could see the end of the dirt road where he needed to turn and go down another road to his house. As he viewed the end of the road Boston saw him. A man stepped out from under a tree and stood still in the middle of the dirt road looking right at Boston.
        This is not good. I need to get out of here now, the night's setting in so I should be able to run away again. Remember what Xavier said, just see what this guy has to say then make your choice to run or not. I don't know what to do about this. Boston's thought kept racing but he had stopped mid stride. There they both stood looking at one another with just forty yards between them.
        This man is not going away unless he finished whatever he came here to do. I have to talk to him. Boston resolve to find out what this man wanted drove his next action, he took one step forward and made sure to step slow. The man didn't flinch. Boston took another step then yelled out, “What do you want?” The man again didn't react. Boston then started walking toward the man at a slow pace. “I'm coming to talk to you. Just tell me what you want.” Boston got closer and closer always ready to sprint the other direction if needed. Twenty yards, ten yards, two yards away then Boston stopped. “Here I am, now what do you want, and who are you?” The man stared into Boston's eyes. This night the man looked very different than the two previous times he saw him. He must have been in his mid fifties, he had a short beard, strong frame, and good height. He held his eyes more open than a normal person and had a face that communicated seriousness and knowledge. His clothes were old as if they had been owned for many years. His shirt was unusual, different from any cotton shirt Boston knew as if it was leather but not so thick and the color was almost black. His pants were from the same material. As Boston took in all the characteristics of this man he heard a sound. It came from the tree the man was hiding under. The sound was like a large foot step that created vibrations Boston felt in his feet. Boston looked toward the tree, but the tree was gone and in its place stood an animal very large gray and it had a trunk. Its an elephant! Boston yelled to himself in his head. Boston started to back up slowly away from an animal that has never been in Chesterville let alone any nearby wildernesses. What is happening? Is the only thing Boston could think.
        “Don't worry about the elephant Boston. I'm here to persuade you.”
        Boston stopped backing up.
        “There are things going on in the world that you know nothing of.”
        Boston was still looking at the elephant, “Yes, this I am sure of. What do you want.”
        “I'm not here to hurt you, I want to protect you, help you. My name is Tus.”
        “I'm, well you know who I am I guess.”
        Tus extended his arm toward Boston to shake hands. Boston extended his as in a reflex that surprised him. It was as if his body was trying to tell him he could trust this man. They shook hands and Tus smiled.
        “Lets go talk Boston. Do you think your house will be a good place?”
        “Okay we can do that.”
        “Tell your Dad no shooting. Tus laughed, he almost got me you know.”
        “Yeah, sorry about that.”
        Boston and Tus walked together towards Boston's home. The elephant started to walk along with them but shortly disappeared out of Boston's sight. They arrived at the home and Boston told Tus to wait outside while he goes and warns his parents who is here. Tus agreed and sat down on a wooden chair on the porch. Boston quickly got inside.
        “Dad, Mom!” They both came hurriedly around the corner to see Boston, undoubtedly worried biased on the past events. Aldo had gotten home a little early from work wanting to be home with Boston. “Dad, Mom okay you're going to have to trust me on this one. I have no idea what's going on around here but remember that man who was following me?”
        Aldo perked up, “Did my bullets get him?”
        “No Dad, well I saw him again and decided to talk to him.”
        “What! What were you thinking? You can never tell what people like that will do.”
        “I know Mom, but I just felt like he wasn't leaving so I thought I might as well see what he wants.”
        Aldo and Milly looked attentively at Boston awaiting the rest of the story. Aldo asked the next question that both he and Milly were thinking, “So, what did he want?”
        As the caboose of Aldo's question fell off his lips Tus opened the Childs door. The door swung open fully so they all could see Tus in his blackened clothing and short beard. Again his eyes were more open than an average persons would be and his strength seemed to be enhanced at this tense moment. Aldo intently stood up looking at Tus.
        “Dad, don't worry. Tus is here to help us and to help me.”
        “You don't know that son. Who are you Tus?
        Tus walked from the doorway into the room and sat down. He seemed very calm, unworried about Aldo and Milly's stress.
        “I will be your friend. Please sit down and let me tell you why I have come.”
        Aldo seeing that Tus was calm and didn't mean any harm as far as he could tell, decided to sit down and listen to what Tus had to say.
        “Thank you for trusting me Aldo, Boston, and Milly. Your son here will be a vital instrument, in fact he has already been showing us things we have been searching for for years. I am Tus from Zuthiss the land of the great trees.”
        Boston was shocked to hear Tus was from Zuthiss and had to interrupt. “Wait, Zuthiss, really? I thought it was a desert losing residents, in fact I had doubted Zuthiss was a real place.”
        “It's a real place Boston, and though it's a desert we have plenty of water because of the great trees. Unfortunately nobody is able to find them anymore, but Chesterville is evidence that they are out there somewhere. Here in Chesterville you have the great trees thanks to the Hendersons. I don't know how, but they were able to find the trees and bring hundreds of seeds back to this city. I have tried many times to find the ancient trees but failed like many people in my town. We know they are out there because of the water being pumped to us from the watery land where they are growing.
        Boston, you nor most people know what is going on in the World. JEX is spreading throughout almost all land and is not stopping. Almost one third of the people in Zuthiss have the infection and many have died because of it. Other villages and cities have been hit hard. Great movements and plans are in the genesis because of this disease.”
        “What plans?” Asked Aldo.
        “I work with Francis Hanson from Price Science, at least he thinks I do, really I pretend to work for him to get the inside scoop on what is happening. About twenty years and yes I was working at Price Science even back then but for different reasons. That's when we first realized how fast JEX was progressing, and that we couldn't stop it even with all the advanced technologies in possession. So Price Science decided to start project RC, RC for reconstruction. The project was first presented to us the workers at a great assembly meeting. Francis Hanson presented the idea. Underground cities were to be built. These cities would be developed like a parking garage having multiple layers stacked one on top of the other but with great space in between each layer. There would be water towers, roads, buildings, factories, homes, recreation, and every other component a city would need. Francis proposed 300 of these enormous cities to be constructed all underground. He said they would be havens for the healthy. Built underground and kept secret so as to protect them from getting infested by the JEX disease. Because many people were getting scared of JEX this plan seemed to be the thing that would save humanity, save some from getting an incurable disease. The plan was approved intently and work became quickly. The locations were kept very secret, even from the workers at Price Science. To me this plan did not feel right. Were we really just going to try and save the healthy leaving the sick to die? I decided then that I would help the cities and villages of the World work together trying to cure the disease and trying to prevent this separation of not just healthy and infected, but separation of Mother from daughter, Father from son, brothers from sisters. That is why I decided to become close friends and work partners with Francis. I wanted to get inside the developments and know where these cities were being built. It took years, but I finally made my way to be the right hand man of Francis. Seven years into the project I was seeing everything from blueprints of the city to the plans on how to get the health people separated out. Boston, I even saw where the cities were being built. It turns out the great trees of Zuthiss have many locations throughout the World. Mysteriously nobody can find any of them now. There is a reason for that. Price Science is protecting the trees, they have set up perimeters around the trees to keep people away. Anyone who comes close gets diverted the other direction. Francis assures me there are no shootings to keep people away, just powerful persuasion. Though I am not so sure about the truth of his words. Luckily in Zuthiss the desert makes it almost impossible to find the trees anyway, so nobody have been reportedly hurt, but I have heard rumor of missing people who go off into the wilderness never returning home.
        The eighth year into the project I was asking Francis if I could go down and inspect how the construction was going. He always denied my requests until the end of that year. He said we would go down together. So we traveled to one of the groupings of the great trees, or haven trees as Price Science would call them. Once there we passed the border patrol, and into the thick trees. We stayed on a dirt path clearly marked leading us directly to the tree we needed. The trees were just like the ones you have here in Chesterville. Francis got out of the vehicle and walked up to the tree trunk through the branches. I followed him. There at the trunk was the shape of a door, even with a little handle like knob. Francis opened it up just like a door and stepped into the tree motioning for me to come inside with him. Once inside the tree I noticed the installed elevator and down we went. We must have been traveling downward for fifteen minutes, and not at any slow rate. The entire time we were going down on the elevator I kept my eyes looking out the gated door. For the entire ride I could see the inside of the tree's trunk. The trees extend thousands of feet underground! I just turned to Francis at the bottom and said, Now I know why you decided to use these trees as the gateway to these havens. I'll tell you, these cities are impressive. There are sixty levels per city and about two hundred yards per level making a grand total of 6.8 miles in height for one city.
        That was the only time I got to look at the developing cities. The following year no one could have expected what happened. Throughout the World almost overnight, Price Science's paths to the trees with doors all disappeared. There are no paths left leading to the trees with doors. The border patrol personnel were all there like usual, but like I said almost overnight the path had disappeared. Francis couldn't explain it, he didn't know how it happened and still doesn't, but neither do I. I think the trees did it themselves to be honest.
        Boston was trying to take this all in and asked Tus, “So why don't they just make an elevator in one of the other trees or drill down through the ground to the cities?”
        “Well they tried going inside one of the other trees, but they are just like the trees we know. The trunk doesn't go down underground for hundreds of feet, it just stops like other trees. Only the trees with doors go down that far. Of course they searched to the door-ed trees again, but this time all searchers told Francis it was different. The trees looked misplaced, and no searcher was able to find a tree with a door. They are still looking Boston. Drilling down, yeah they tried that too. Unfortunately for them the ground around the trees is so dense with rock and minerals no modern drill can penetrate the ground more than a few feet. Francis had many requests to just drill down in a new location, but he refuses thinking that others will catch on to the plan if they move to a new location and start drilling wide enough for elevators. Francis is right about that, people are suspicious and are watching Price Science very closely hoping to figure there plans out almost at many cost.
        You know there are thousands of people down there right now. When the paths disappeared eleven years ago, apparently the elevators were destroyed or something because there has not been one person to come back us from the cities. We feel like they are just fine because of all the food and supplies they have down there, but seriously there are people down there mostly workers still trying to built their massive places, but they are close to finishing. We do want to get to them again. I want to get them out, Francis wants to add to their numbers. He thinks they are the lucky ones safe from the disease.
        I am uniting the tribes and cities of the World Boston to fight this separation, stop this focus on building underground cities and actually work on finding a cure.
        Franic and I are working to find a way back to the cities, but he thinks we are looking for the door-ed trees for the same reason. As we travel the World searching each location we know of with the great trees, we try talking to locals to get their knowledge to see if they have discovered one of the trees themselves. We also spend hours in the trees looking.
        Boston this is where you come into the picture. In Zuthiss we have many legends and traditions. One legend is the leaves of the great trees are as alive when they fall off the tree as when are are on it. When they fall off they make wonderful shapes as you and the people of Chesterville know well. They can also find certain people. Special people with a purpose that the trees know. The leaves will find these people and lead them back into the trees. Back and back the leaves lead you until they show you to a tree with a door. Inside the door is presented to you a great tool in helping you fulfill your special mission. This legend is told to all children in Zuthiss. I have always believed it to be true. Now I know the legend is true thanks to you Boston. The leaves follow you and want to guide you. I can show you photos from my camera of the leaves following you. It is almost unbelievable, but then again you all have seen unusual things lately so many you will believe this too. Boston I want you to come traveling with Francis and I to find the entrances to the cities so these people can go back home. Help us Boston, the leaves will guide you every time if you let them. And the first place to start is here in Chesterville. I'll suggest to Francis that you bring someone with you to support and encourage you to keep going, that way you can have a friend come along.”
        Things started to make a little more sense to Boston now. He remembered Brighton's video showing the leaves following him, he remembered Francis stopping by his house and asking to talk to him. Boston felt for some unplaced reason that this was something for him, that is was something he was supposed to do though when he thought more about it the more odd the mission became, but his gut feeling was to go. “I'll go.” Boston's answer surprised even him.
        “Wait Boston, you need to think this over first.” Milly was sounding the warning to consider all the options. “I have never heard of these cities before. Have you Aldo?”
        “Well, actually I have heard some rumors about them from various patients at work. One patient said he broke his ankle while looking for a door in Henderson park. Maybe we let Boston try to find a door here first and see how that goes.  That explains a lot as far as where all these people have gone missing to.  Think of all the people down there, all the workers.  It makes so much sense now.  Why so many families haven’t been getting communication from their children, they didn’t want anyone to know!  It’s completely wrong, and now they are trapped down there waiting for some light to come save them.  What if they would come back?  Think of the happiness it would bring to the families in Chesterville, to families across the World.”
        “Yeah Mom, you saw the video yourself. The leaves were following me. Maybe they will lead me to something in the park.”
        “Okay Boston you can look here for now to see what happens, but as far as traveling the World goes we will have to think about that.”
        Tus listened carefully to the Childs conversations. “I will let Francis know right away that you will started your search here. Who should I tell him will be your friend on the potential future adventures?”
        As Boston thought about his family and friends deciding who to choose, the phone rang. “I'll get that.” Boston jumped up and ran over to the phone. “Hello. Hey Xavier. No we haven't eaten yet. What? Really? That is awesome, thanks for your help my friend. Have a good one. Bye” Boston stayed out of sight to celebrate the news he got from Xavier. Xavier had found Latisha outside mowing the lawn. He was able to stop her from mowing and talk to her before Chelsea noticed him outside. He was told by Latisha that Chelsea would always talk about Boston hoping that one day they would get to know each other better.
        Boston sat back and dreamed up great dates for Chelsea and myself to go on. Wonderful times are ahead he thought to himself. Then he came back to Earth and remembered Tus in the other room waiting for Boston to decide on someone to go with him on these travels around the World. A crazy thought came to his mind. Chelsea. No, she wouldn't go or would she, maybe. It would be an adventure together. I might as well ask. Boston came back into the other room where Aldo, Milly, and Tus were all laughing. It looked like Tus was winning over their confidence and trust.
        “I'll be taking Chelsea.”
        “Great.” Tus answered quick and positive as he got out his phone and started dialing for Francis.
        “Chelsea? Is that the girl you have been talking about with us the other night?”
        “Yes Mom, she is in town right now, came early for the presenting and to see me apparently.”
        “Where is she from?”
        “I can't remember.”
        “Have you two been on any dates together?”
        “Not yet.”
        “How well do you know her?”
        “Well, not very well yet, but tonight we are meeting up for little date.”
        Milly looked a little worried, but at the same time surprisingly calm. Boston felt as if Milly knew Chelsea was the right choice if he was to go on this trip. Aldo had the same look as Milly. Tus was on the phone with Francis and explaining to him all the recent events. Tus glanced back toward Boston and said, “I have to go now, I'll meet up with you tomorrow morning right here at your house, and we can start our searching.” Tus left.
        Boston quickly started getting ready for the date with Chelsea and thought about how he was going to ask her to come with him on this adventure. As Boston went toward the door to leave both Aldo and Milly were standing there waiting. Aldo's voice broke the silence.
        “Use your head Boston, be safe. We love you.”
        “Yes we do.”
        “I love you both.” Then Boston left toward Latisha's home to get Chelsea.
        On the way to Latisha’s house Boston would occasionally look around at trees thinking potentially they would turn into an elephant.  He wondered why Tus hadn’t explained why or how the elephant was there.  And just as fast as it had appeared, the elephant was gone.  Tus had acted like he was familiar with the animal and didn’t seem alarmed at Boston’s mentioning of it.  He must know much more about this elephant, thought Boston.
Arriving at Latisha’s door for Chelsea he knocked hoping Chelsea would be the one to answer.  
“Hi Boston.”
“Hello hello, hope I’m not too late for our adventures tonight.”
“Right on time, we finished dinner and I just got done getting ready.”
“Perfect, so then you're ready to go?”   
“Yep.  What’s the plan for tonight?”
“Oh, you’ll see, but we should bring flashlight just incase we need them later.”
“Good idea, I’ll grab one for me and one for you.”
Boston and Chelsea left the house together, the night had almost settled in completely now but small traced of light would still be detected.  Though Boston didn’t have the night date plan fully configured, he thought they could at least start out by going to one of the walls.  Chesterville had a mountain ridge running by the town.  Holdem mountain was considered high altitude at the peak, but it drastically tapered off lower and lower as the mountain neared Chesterville.  Boston was familiar with the mountain having been there with his family on multiple occasions.  What drew most people to the mountain was the unusual characteristic of random rapid tall points throughout the downward slope.  As the mountain gradually got smaller the further away you went from the peak, you would run into a random mini peak or wall as the people who climb the mountain called them.  The walls seemed out of place, tall and skinny with the rest of the mountain sloping downward as usual.  These random bursts of Earth from the mountain’s side were all over, and people liked going to the base of them to see just how tall they are.  Never did one of the walls exceed the height of the peak, they didn’t even come close, but they did soar above the trees in the area.  Boston wanted to take Chelsea to one of these walls since they were only minutes from the nearest one.  They started walking together toward the mountain slope and the wall.
        “First I want to show you something unique to Chesterville.  I’m sure you have seen these from your drive into town or from coming here before.  Let’s go to one of the walls on the lower parts of Holdum Mountain.”
        “Sounds great.  I’ve never been close to them before but I know what your talking about.  I think Latisha and Rebecca are a little scared to go near them because they tell me all sorts of stories about the walls.”
        “Oh, yeah I have heard a few of them myself.  Which ones have they told you?”
        “Well, like the one that says, “The animals of the forest gather by the wall because they know they’ll meet little Saul.  Saul gets to the wall sits down for a rest, and the story ends in a mess.”  That one is not my favorite but its one I can remember.”
        “Yeah that was recited perfectly, funny that’s the one you remembered.”  They both laughed.   “I have another one for you, maybe you’ve heard it.  The wall is rocky, tall, and old.  Many believe inside you can find gold.  Hundreds try and fail, for at the task of getting through the rock there is none who prevail.  A person must have wisdom to open a rock without hands, he must know how a rock sits as it stands.  Yes, the wall’s rocky sides put all tools in a bind, but the wise person knoweth in the wall there is nothing but kind.”
        “Now, that one I like.  It’s a lot less scary.”
        “Yeah its a good one.  So Chelsea I wanted to ask you about that note you gave me.”
        “Oh right.  Did that man ever meet up with you?  I knew he was following you the first moment I saw that guy.  He would always keep an eye on you.  I don’t know, for some reason I just knew what he was up to.  Unfortunately I have had some people stock me too.  It’s really uncomfortable, so I got good at recognizing it.”
        “You were right.  That guy was following me.”
        “Oh I knew it!  Did you ever run into him?”
“Yes actually I did.”
“What did he want?”
Boston paused for a second thinking about if this would be the time to tell her about the future adventures and about Tus, the elephant, and the trees.
“You don’t have to tell me if you don’t want to, I didn’t mean to pry.”
“Oh you’re not prying don’t worry, I was just thinking.  Maybe I can tell you about it once we get to the wall?”
“Sounds good.”
They kept going in the direction of the walls, talking about family, future plans, and school.  Boston learned that Chelsea knew music really well.  She loved being with her family but they were on a family vacation she couldn’t go on because of school and her many tests the same week of the trip.  Otherwise her family lived just two hours from Chesterville in a city called Lotts.  Lotts was larger than Chesterville by about double the population though in square footage Lotts was smaller than Chesterville.  Lotts was known around surrounding towns for their annual tradition of building climbing.  Each year they have people sign up, and people sign up by the thousands; to climb the tall buildings of Lotts.  They use little hand and foot devices that help them climb quickly up the building, the fastest times win.  The city sets up large nets all around the buildings the catch anyone who may fall.  Every year there are many people who fall, but no one has died in all the years they have done the tradition.  The nets as Lotts says, are fool proof.  Of course before you participate you have to sign their waiver. 
They turned up the mountain side for a short hike to the wall.
“You can see it now, the wall and all of it’s glory.”
“It does look larger than I thought.”
“Yeah this is a good one, rocky, tall, and old.”
They got to the base of the massive pillar.  The sides were rocky, though the outside was not solid rocky.  Some of the rock would fall off if a person pulled hard enough, but underneath the more brittle fragmented rock it was very hard and seemingly impenetrable.  The inside composition flowed together as one continuous structure.  Around the pillar of rock no plant life could be seen nor much dirt.  The ground was covered in smaller rockers with the nearest plants and bushes twenty yards away.  The trees were even further away at thirty yards from the pillar.  As Chelsea looked at the tall wall of rock she realized it was not just impressive on the merit of height alone, but the colors infused into the rock formation were brilliant.  She wanted to get a closer look at the different shades of white, blue, and purple.  She could see at the base of the pillar much more blues and purples then as she examined higher up the wonderful pure white color was being emphasised with slight traces of the blues and purples throughout the white rock.  This wall was a beautiful sight.  Chelsea wondered what it would look like with more light since the night had dimmed almost all sunlight though the full moon was compensating.  
Chelsea walked around the side looking closely at the rock.  “Hey Boston, you never told me these walls had stairs.”
“Stairs?  No, they don’t have, oh wait is this one of those stories?”
“Seriously Boston come look.  I really think these are stairs in the stone.”
Boston took out the flashlight Chelsea had given him before they left Latisha’s house, and shined it on the pillar.  The colors came even more alive with the bright light of the flashlight.  Boston walked around to where Chelsea was.  She already had her flashlight out and was shining it on the rocky pillar.  Boston was stunned as he saw what looked like little steps cut into the pillar’s side.  The steps were small enough that a person could walk two steps at a time with no extra effort.
“Chelsea, those are definitely steps.  Makes sense with all the other unusual things happening.”
“Wait, what other unusual things?  Just that man who was following you?”
“Yeah, him and some others things.”
“You can tell me Boston, I’ve had some crazy things happen in my life, trust me.”
“I do trust you.  You remember that man who was following me right?  Well I decided to talk to him.  His name is Tus by the way.  Anyway, he showed up on the same road I was walking on to get home just today.  I walked up to him to see what he wanted and why he was following me.  Before he responded I heard some noise and when I looked to see what the noise was I saw, and I know this will sound weird but just hear me out; I saw an elephant.”
“Really?”
“Really, I didn’t see it at all before hearing that noise then there it was, an elephant.  Tus started talking to me when he saw me staring at the animal.  Tus is from Zuthiss, have you hear about that place?”
“I don’t think so.”
“I’ll tell you more about it later, its basically the place where the Hendersons that created Henderson park found those amazing trees.  Well, Tus wanted to go to my house and talk so we did and there he explained how JEX was spreading over the world and how Price Science was constructing these secret underground cities for people who aren’t infected to protect them and to save people for the future.  They used to get to the cities through doors in the trees like we have in Henderson park, but a few years ago they lost the paths to get to the doors and no workers have come up from the cities since.  Tus wants to find the doors again to get those people out, he is also trying to unite cities around the World to stop this separation of uninfected and infected people.  I know this is so much information to take in.  I kind of just poured the entire picture on you there.”
Chelsea stood trying to take in all the information.  Every once in a while she would ask a question or two then Boston would answer the best he knew.  Chelsea sat down thinking about this new information for a few more seconds and asked Boston more questions.  Boston would go over different parts again trying to explain even better.  Once Boston felt like Chelsea understood at least as much as he did he sat down next to her feeling alleviated to finally tell someone what has been happening.  
“Wow that is unusual.  Its a lot of information but I think I have the full picture now.  I feel like you're not joking Boston, you’re not joking right?”
“Not joking.”
        “That really is incredible.  I guess I hadn't realized the extents they would go to “protect” the healthy.  So, Boston did Tus say why he to tell you all this?”
        “Right, well you know the trees and how they have those neat leaves that make shapes when they fall?  Well the leaves have been following me, and Tus thinks they will lead us to the doored trees.  These people must have been watching me for some time now because they sent me a letter wanting me to join the team.  Since Price Science was interested I’m sure their influence was transferred to other scientific institutions because they too have sent me letters to come join them.  Price Science knows about the leaves and wants me to help them find the doored trees so they can continue with the underground cities.  In fact Tus invited me, to be undercover of course; to go with him, Francis, and who ever else they have come along to travel around the World and find the doors.  Tus said that I could take one person with me on this adventure, for a support and help.  Chelsea you’re the only person I have explained all of this to, your absolutely beautiful and I’ve been hoping to take you on a date for some time now.  Would you come with me on this adventure?”
Chelsea didn’t answer Boston immediately, instead she looked past his shoulder and shone the flashlight on the strains of the pillar wall.  Chelsea stood up and looked at Boston with a little smile.  Then Chelsea took off running toward the stairs.  Boston jumped up and ran trying to catch up to her.  Chelsea was seven steps up the pillar before Boston ascended step one.  He climbed as fast as possible but Chelsea kept sprinting up the steps keeping her lead.  Every so often Boston would hear Chelsea laughing, and he knew this was her answer to his question.  She was showing him she could handle adventure.  Boston though running and now breathing hard; was laughing as well.  He was so happy the running became joyous.  Up they climbed, higher and higher not caring how high or how little foot hold the steps provided.  Soon the dark ground blended together not being able to discern a tree from the dark mast below.  Boston hardly noticed the number to stairs they were climbing or the fact his legs were screaming for him to stop.  He kept going following Chelsea and putting everything else aside.  The only image that caught Boston’s eye besides the next stair step, was peculiar boxed outlines on the pillar.  The boxed outlines were every one hundred steps or so as Boston estimated.  They were tall about eight feet and about half that side wide.  The outline was noticeable with his flashlight but it otherwise blended in with the rocky side of the pillar.  Though this image struck a chord within Boston’s memories he continued up the stairs.  
There she was, at the top of the pillar waiting for him.  She was in great shape to run up so many steps and for so long, he himself felt like all energy had left him and was breathing hard.  They had finally reached the top of the pillar.  A flat wavy top with relatively smooth rock having a few cracks surprised Boston as the surface of the top of the pillar.  He expected to see the large pillar come to a point, but instead they both had room to walk around on the smooth rock.  The steps had taken them all the way up not faulting to the left or right but staying strong and sturdy, this now was there end.  Chelsea was smiling at Boston, “Do I want to go with you?  I would love to.”
“You know you could have said that at the bottom of the pillar.”  Boston and Chelsea laughed.
“I knew you would want to know what was on top of these things, plus I was curious too.”
“Chelsea are you sure you want to come along?  This will be a journey that can’t be predicted, we are going to places I’m sure neither of us have even heard about.”
“Boston, I’m sure, don’t ask me again.”
From then on Boston knew she would be firm in her decision and he got excited for the adventure together.  They sat down together hanging their legs off the edge of the pillar.  The full moon was shining bright, but they were so high up on the pillar’s top that the ground was almost a dark mist with some larger trees catching the moon’s light disclosing to Boston and Chelsea that the ground and it’s components had not disappeared.
“I should tell you that Tus said we would start looking for doors here in Chesterville.”
“Really?  So they are building a city underneath Chesterville right now?”
Boston hadn’t thought much about that idea, that a city was being constructed under his home town.  “Yeah I guess so.  I wonder what’s down there.  Tus said he went down once, but didn’t explain what everything looked like.”
“It would be interesting to see what’s down there.  Boston, do you think the leaves will lead you to a door leading to the cities?”
“Tus thinks so, I guess I…”  Boston stopped mid sentence as his eye imported new information overriding almost any other thought he currently held.  He saw two images moving on the ground below them, and moving fast.  The images Boston quickly recognized as being human.  They were running in unison, but why and who were they.  Their path was difficult to follow since it was patternless and the ground was only lighted up by the moon in areas with few trees.  Boston kept his eyes on them trying to follow their movement.  They could move swift through the trees almost effortlessly and in harmony.  The two bodies seemed large for humans but Boston knew they were human.  Boston couldn’t detect any sound from them, just movement.
“Hey Chelsea, look down there.  Do you see those people running?” 
“What?  Down there?  No I don’t see anything.  Are you sure your mind isn’t playing tricks on you?”
“I’m sure.  Follow my finger, I’ll point them out.”
Chelsea tried to focus and squinted her eyes just a bit.  “Oh, I see them.  They are moving quick.  Why do you think they are running?”
Boston though about all the people who would come up to these pillar’s at night and in the day time.  He thought maybe these two were playing night games, but no one he knew ran that fast during night games and for so long.  Then Boston noticed these two people didn’t have any light, no flashlights or headlights to guide their path.  How was that possible through the thick of the forest?
“Boston, they are running toward this pillar.”
Boston felt a twinge of fear try and sprout in his soul, but the fear was trampled out by the fact that Chelsea had no detectable fear in her voice which gave Boston courage.  “Yes, they really are.  Lets get our flashlights ready, I think I know why they are coming.”


Chelsea backed away from the edge of the pillar and grabbed her flashlight being sure not to turn it on. 
“We need to be careful, those people looked larger than most men.  They has something unusual about them, running without light in these woods would almost be impossible.”  Boston held his flashlight more like a weapon ready to use for self defense than for a light source.  Boston quickly dropped to his stomach and leaned over the edge of the pillar.  Chelsea did the same.  They saw the two people running but they were closer now.  Boston and Chelsea could see they were slowing down their pace but it was still faster than many people could move.  The two people neared the same pillar Boston and Chelsea were on then they stopped.  Boston couldn’t tell what they were doing from the distance he was at, but they were not moving and stood in the open area without any bushes or trees by the pillar.  As they watched these two people stand in silence on the ground, Boston and Chelsea noticed the wind start to pick up.  Boston looked at the trees these two people had come through and saw those trees moving almost violently with shaking and bending at if they would break or fall down.  Then something hit Boston’s face.  It was not hard but deeply surprised Boston causing him to jump up and his feet and almost lose his balance over the edge of the pillar.  Chelsea quickly grabbed him and helped him gain his balance.  
“What was that!”
“I think it was a leaf that hit your face.”
“Wow, that came out of nowhere.”
As Boston turned to look at the direction where to the stairs meet the top of the pillars he noticed there were hundreds of leaves floating as if in mid air just above the last step piled on top of each other and in random clusters.  These were the leaves from the famous trees in Henderson park  They were coming to Boston again.
“These are the leaves that were following me earlier like I was telling you about.”
“Boston, I have never seen anything like this, what are they doing just floating there moving about one another?”
As Boston thought about Chelsea’s question he looked over the edge of the pillar where the two people had been and noticed hundreds of leaves surrounding them as well.  The leaves by the two people then moved and started floating up the stairs of the pillar.  The two people followed after the leaves climbing up the stairs much faster than either Chelsea or Boston.  
“Those guys are coming up the pillar”  Boston told Chelsea as he started toward the stairs himself.
“Are you going down to meet them?”
“Do you remember on our way up here there were door like outlines about every hundred steps?  I think these guys are going to one of those doors.”
“You might be right about that.  What about these leaves?”
“You’re right I wonder if they are trying to block me from going down?”
Chelsea walked over to the floating leaves and took a step on the top stairs.  In reaction the leaves lowered down a few steps.
“I guess not, I think they want us to go down.”
“Okay, lets go.”
Boston stepped past Chelsea and they started down the steps toward the first door on their path.  The leaves moved down with them step by step.  As they started to move quicker the leaves would thin out becoming less in number.  By the time they reached the first door outline the leaves were only twenty in number.  Boston and Chelsea kept going down toward the next door.  After eighty more steps the leaves were completely gone, they slowed their pace and walked down the steps slowly.
“Do you hear anything Boston?”
Boston walked slowly ahead trying to hear any movement, but didn’t hear a thing until it was too late.  From around the bend in the pillar two men engulfed Boston and Chelsea in black sacks.  Everything was dark before the sacks were covering them, but now the darkness was thick without hope of light penetrating.  The sack was forced over them both like catching an animal once they were inside the sacks rope tied off the top to prevent any chance of escape.  All Boston could hear was Chelsea scream but knew she was physically fine since he was never hit by this man just skillfully put in this strange bag.  The entire time neither one of the men spoke.
The men carried Boston and Chelsea down the steps.  The movement was still quick, but only lasted a few more steps where they stopped.  Boston knew they were at one of the doors on the pillar.  They were still half way up on the pillar itself and the steps hadn’t become any more wide but the two men walked on them without fear of falling and without stumbling, like they had come up and down their stairs hundreds of times before.  Boston felt his body clash into Chelsea as the two men stood together and pushed on the outlined door.  The two men walked forward, as the door swung inward.  Once inside the men quickly closed the door, set the bags down, and to Boston’s knowledge left.  Neither Boston or Chelsea spoke a word and eventually they both fell asleep.


“Chelsea are you okay?”  Boston had woken up first and after minutes of silence decided to call out to Chelsea.  He was still bound and blinded by the bag his body was still in.  Boston didn’t hear any response from Chelsea.  He thought, As soon as she decides she will go on this adventure we get kidnapped.  Maybe it would have been better to not have mentioned this whole thing, then she would have been safe.  Though the underground cities and plans would still be there along with all it’s ties to Francis so maybe inviting her to come was not such a bad idea.  At least she knows more about what’s really happening around us.  Plus, she could have said no.  Boston heard footsteps coming closer to them.  He was sure it was their captors.  Boston lay still.  One of them came over to Boston and he felt his large hands grab the top of the gab.  With a swoosh of the man’s knife the top of the gab was cut clean off and Boston saw one of the captors for the first time.  He was a large man with plenty of muscle.  The clothes he wore were different than the usual attire in Chesterville but the clothes didn’t seem out of place.  He had a black beard, and a blue hat on.  Boston looked around directly after analyzing this man looking for Chelsea.  The other captor was releasing Chelsea.  He was about the same size and also had a beard but his was brown.  He had a red hat on which was shaped different from the blue hat.  The red hat had sharp edges around the top shaped like a crown.  The blue hat was more like a baseball cap without the brim and it was stuffed with some material making it stand taller.  The blue and red hats both had medium sized pins in them that were flattened on the side pointing out of the hat.  The flat part was shaped in many different forms.  Some pins had a fire design on them and were pointy.  Other pins had water, trees, rocks, people, or animals.  Boston was distracted by these pins wondering what they meant until he hear Chelsea scream.
“Who are you two?  What do you want with us?”  Chelsea was screaming the questions so loud it made Boston realize how small of a cave type room they were in.  Her voice echoed off every stone wall and back at them again.  
“Quiet down, quiet down.  We are trying to recover from the shock of actually finding you guys.  I’m Red and this is Blue, as you can tell from our hats.  We come from the great land of protectors, Hindlighten.  All people of Hindlighten are trained to be great protectors, I don’t suppose you have heard of it?”
“Of course they haven’t heard of it Red, nobody hears of Hindlighten unless they are protected by the great people of the city.”
Red looked at Blue communicating complete understanding of his last sentence, but persisted that Boston and Chelsea answer the question with the wave of his hand. 
Boston searched his mind, but couldn’t remember anything about such a place.  “Sorry Red, Blue is right, I haven’t heard about the city.”  Chelsea just shook her head no.
“No matter, allow me to tell you a bit more since we have been sent along with others to be your protectors, and you what’s your name?”
“My name?  Oh, Chelsea.”
“Right, and you Chelsea, we will also protect you because you're with Boston and we can see you're helping him too.  In Hindlighten no one leaves to keep the city secret from attack and other trouble.  Of course the people can leave if they want but they are not allowed to come back.  The only exception is when we are out protecting people, after the task is complete we head straight back to Hindlighten.  We are all trained to be great protectors of people with special missions that need accomplishing.  Training all our life we hope to one day get the opportunity to protect someone with a very important mission.  There is vast volumes and paintings in our city of future missions people will be called to do.  One mission known by all our people is in conjunction with the leaves from the “great trees” I believe you call them.  We call these magnificent trees Light trees and thus you see our city name Hindlighten because we follow behind the lighted path given to us by the leaves of the trees.  It is the leaves that lead us to those we protect.  So, the legend that all our people know is that the leaves lead groups of protectors to a special person who has a special mission.  This person will need great protection from many who will try to destroy him.  Though the best of protectors are chosen, many will die trying to protect.  But, those who do survive will see the light of what this person will do.  The person will be known easily because the leaves not only guide him, but they will follow.”
Immediately Boston’s mind saw the video Brighton took when he was walking by Henderson park.  He saw the leaves in the video.  They were following him.  “Red, Blue, why are you here?”
“Boston, we are here because legends have been written, years of training has been complete, and leaves have lead us to you.  You are that person that the legends were written about.  Many people know that the leaves follow you, and not only that but they lead you as well.  I present Blue, and myself as your protectors.”
“You're certain you have the right person?”
“Yes.  And now you better get going, Tus will be waiting for you two to start the search for the doored trees.  I myself am not so certain the leaves are leading you to these underground cities, but I could be wrong.”
Chelsea asked, “How do you two know Tus?”
Boston had wondered this too remembering that Tus said he was from Zuthiss not Hindlighten.
Blue moved forward and started to speak.         
        “Tus is one of the best protectors Hindlighten has ever known.  Yes he has been living in Zuthiss for the past few years, but he is a legend himself having grown up and trained in Hindlighten.  At the end of our training as protectors we are awarded a colored hat to match our group and style of protection.  Nobody gets a hat until they have proven themselves many times and have become extremely skilled.  As you can see Red and I are different groups but we work well together.  When you are awarded a hat it is a great honor and privilege.  Special things have been known to happen as these presentations.  Red for example not only received his hat, but a gift came to him with the hat.  The moment Red put on his hat he looked at me and I felt Red talk to my mind.  He does it all the time now and I’m not the only one he can do that to.”
“Don’t leave yourself on the street without light there Blue.  When Blue received his hat it was like he was struck by a lightning bolt.  He ran over to where they make stone spheres which by the way are five feet tall by five feet wide; he picked one of those up raised it above his head and smashed it down on his head.  I thought that was the last time I would see Blue alive, but the rock didn’t kill him, it broke to pieces.  Blue was given the great gift of strength.”
“So back to my story, when Tus was ready to receive his hat our leaders were not able to find a single hat.  They looked strenuously for hours but found nothing.  People were starting to think they had been secretly invaded having all the hats stolen from them.  In all the commotion Tus stayed in his spot waiting.  The legend says that’s when it came.  A large elephant was spotted walking through the streets of Hindlighten.  We don’t have elephants there, but nonetheless an elephant came walking through.  As soon as people saw it they knew it was coming to Tus.  Not all people are given a hat when training has been completed.  Some are given a companion instead of a hat.  A companion is only given to protectors who are, well legendary, or you could say extremely good.  The companion is never seen by others except during the time the protector receives the gift.  After that Tus’s elephant stays hidden to the World though Tus can always see his elephant.  The companion like the hat can give you special gifts, but we don’t know what Tus’s gift are nor does anyone else.”
Boston couldn’t believe it had been Tus who came to accompany him on this adventure.  He felt proud to work with Tus and happy to have protectors.  He wondered about Tus’s elephant how the World wasn’t able to see it, but he had seen the elephant and Tus knew Boston had seen it.  Why was I able to see the elephant?  Boston also felt the words of Red and Blue hit him with realization that there were people out there who wanted to harm him and stop whatever mission it was he was on.
Chelsea spoke up asking a question Boston was sure she hoped to get a yes answer to.  “So Red and Blue, will you be walking back with us to Chesterville?”
“Well, we will be close by always.  But you will likely never see us nor the others protecting you.  Tus of course will be with you two, but we protect out of sight and only come closer when needed.  Don’t worry though, remember Blue has great strength.”
“And Red can communicate to minds, giving powerful influence.”
“Chelsea and I thank you Red and Blue, we are honored to have you protect us from whatever is out there.”
Blue walked over to the great stone door and pushed it open.  Red and Blue walked out first and sprinted down the steps of stone.  They were gone and out of sight quicker than Boston had hoped.  Boston and Chelsea started down the stairs, and at the bottom looked around at the trees seeing if anything was lurking in the shadows to attack.  Boston noticed the sunlight illuminating the trees, bushes, and ground of Holdum mountain.  They had spent the night in the cave with Red and Blue.  Boston felt the excitement build up within himself to travel Henderson park with Chelsea and Tus seeing if they would be lead by the leaves to find a doored tree.  Boston and Chelsea walked toward Chesterville.


“Mom, Dad?”  Boston stepped into the doorway of the Childs home and wondered how early Tus had wanted to get started.
“Boston!  Your home!”  Milly came running downstairs and hugged Boston as if he had been resurrected.  “We were so worried last night about you.  You never came back home.”
“Sorry Mom, we didn’t really have a choice.”  
Just then Milly noticed Chelsea standing in the same room as them.  “Chelsea, how are you?  So sorry to come rushing down from bed, I was just so worried about you two.  It’s so good to finally meet you.”
“Good to meet you.”
“Well you two must be exhausted.  Let me get some breakfast going, and you can tell me about last night.”
“Boston my boy, where were you last night?”  Aldo came down the stairs wrapping his robe tighter around his body seeing that Chelsea was there as well.  “Your Mom slept about twenty minutes last night you know.”
“Morning Dad.  Yeah, Mom’s making breakfast and we can tell you what happened to us.  But we are fine now so don’t worry.”
“Good to meet you, you must be the famous Chelsea we have been hearing about.”
“Not so famous, but yes I’m Chelsea, good to meet you too.”
“Well come in and have breakfast then.  Your friend Tus hasn’t come quite yet.  Then again it’s only six in the morning.”
They all sat at the dinner table next to the kitchen.  Milly was finishing the breakfast while Boston and Chelsea told of last night’s adventures.  They more they told of Red and Blue and the cave, Boston would feel more and more safe and secure.  He knew there was opposition out there ready to destroy whatever his exact mission was, but he knew there were also many protectors to help.  He was happy Chelsea was coming along this adventure, she was smart made Boston feel more brave.  Though alone and without any help Boston still felt this was something he must do.  It was like a calling that arose from plain ground, unexpected and unpredictable.  He knew the leaves would find him again and would lead him closer to his mission.
The aroma of breakfast throughout the kitchen was a familiar smell to Boston and one that he savoured this morning as he pondered the future travels thinking a breakfast here together might not happen again for a long time.
A knock came from the door.  Boston stood and walked over to open it.  Tus stood at the door dressed in his unique leathery cotton black clothes.
“Great to see you again Boston.  I was hoping you wouldn’t run away after meeting Red and Blue.”
“How did you know about that?”
“Didn’t they tell you, I’m one of your protectors.”  Chelsea came around the corner from the kitchen.  “Well well, is this her?  This is the girl that you have chosen?  Is this Chelsea?”  Chelsea stood tall and held an unintimidated stance.  “Boston has confidence in you, but are you sure about coming on this adventure?  You will see unusual things, things that may make you sad, things that cut your heart at night, things that challenge your mind and sanity, things that cause the average person turn away and go home.  No odds are with us, few are with us, and unmapped roads are ahead.  This is a glimpse to what’s ahead Chelsea and it can be expected from the moment we walk out the door, if in fact you do come.”  
Chelsea looked straight at Tus and said, “Guess we better get started.”  Then she walked directly out the front door.
“I could have told you Tus, she is one hundred percent in.”
“I noticed.”
Milly and Aldo came over to wish Boston luck before they left.  “I can tell you about Red and Blue another time, just know they along with Tus and others are going to be my protectors during this journey.  I wish you two could come with us, but Tus said I can only bring one other person.”
Aldo reached into his pocket and handed Boston a phone.  “Always keep this with you, the battery will last for years without any charge.  We will be helping you from here, you can count on that.  Keep in touch through the phone as best as you can when you’re not home.  We love you.”


Tus, Boston, and Chelsea came to the edge of Henderson park.  Tus took the lead crossing the border separating Chesterville’s normal town life from the mystery of the park.  Tus walked with purpose and in a planned path.  Boston didn’t understand where they were going since the tree door could be located anywhere in the large park.  There are many places in Henderson park that most people never travel.  These places are deep in the park where the trees grow thickest.  Growing thick in Henderson park meant that the trees were spaced thirty to forty yards away from one another.  At the edges on the park where most people see the large trees there stands between some trees sixty yards.  The measurement is from the trunk of the tree, so the branches bring the trees much closer, but never do any of the trees touch another. 
 Surprisingly even in the furthest parts of the park the grass is still cut and no trash can be spotted.  The Henderson family grounds crew makes sure the park is always in top condition.  Boston looked around as they walked quickly to keep up with Tus.  He loved how beautiful the park looked feeling gratitude for the Henderson family and the good work they do.  The large trees were so inviting.  The branches hung low and soared high above the trunk of the tree.  The leaves populated each branch, large and currently all the same color; nonplussed by this Boston started at the numerous leaves and wondered where the vast amounts of leaves he had seen following him and leading him had come from.  After falling behind a bit from the pace of Tus Boston jogged forward to rejoin Chelsea and Tus.  They continued on their journey nearing the outer edge of the middle section of the park.  Boston tried finding one of the crew members working, but didn’t see a soul.  
“Hey Tus, where exactly are we going in the park?”
“We are going to the white tree.”  
As soon as Tus had mentioned the white tree Boston saw Chelsea turn her head like a whip looking straight at Tus.  “Tus, why are we going to the white tree?  Is this the same white tree that people come to from all over the World to present themselves to?”
“That’s the one.”  Chelsea’s demeanor changed from a cautious walk to an excited gallop.  Boston could see she was energized by the fact they were going to the white tree.  “Boston needs to present himself to the white tree so we can get started on following the leaves to the door.”
“The presentations are not for another two weeks.”  
Chelsea is right, the presentations are only every six months, thought Boston.
“That would be true if we were going to the big event when everyone comes to present themselves, but the truth is you can present yourself anytime you want.  You hear of the most experiences happening to people during the events probably because there is just more people presenting.  Few people realize you can present yourself at any time during the year.  The tradition of the big presenting event every six months has grown into an unwritten law or rule dictating when you can present yourself.  The trees do not care when you come before them, just that you do.”
They neared the large white tree.  The familiar rise of the earth forming a hill stood as a marker in the park as to where the white tree could be found.  They rounded the hill and saw it, it stood slightly taller than the rest of the trees and possessed brilliant white leaves.  The sun was overheard now and shone its pure light upon the leaves.  They glimmered and danced in the sunlight showing to the park just how white they were.  Shadows formed on the ground under the branches of the tree inviting all who were sun stricken to come and enjoy the coolness of shade.  Boston could see why so many came before this tree to present themselves.  The tree had large branches hanging down toward to the ground.  The trunk of the tree couldn’t be seen through all the branches.  There was a slight breeze in the park making the white leaves sway back and forth with a mellifluous hum.  Chelsea stared at the tree with amazement.  Tus walked close to the tree’s branches and sat on the ground.  Boston had never before presented himself before the tree, and stopped Chelsea before she too sat down next to Tus.
“Chels, how exactly does someone present before the tree?”
“Well, it’s different for each person.  Just do whatever comes to you when you’re in front of the tree.  Some people give a talk to the tree, others will sing, dance, or just stand there hoping the tree will respond.”
“I’ll give it a shot, but this doesn’t mean I lost the tomato contest.”
“Tomato contest?  Those poor plants have probably long died and become part of the earth by now.”
“Yeah, who knows.”  They both laughed and Boston turned to walk to the tree.  Tus was standing in front of him.
“Not now Boston, look to your right.”
Boston looked over his shoulder.  Through the trees he could see white figures.  It was the scientists.  There looked to be about ten of them.  They were all grouped together looking at one of the trees.  Their white lab coats reminded Boston of his experience when he was littler trying to run through the shape of an elephant the leaves had made, but was stopped by one of the scientist.  
“Scientists.  What are they doing?” asked Boston.
“They like the rest of us are trying to understand these trees.  I’m surprised there is only ten of them out here.  Usually there is at least twenty”, responded Chelsea.
Tus nodded in agreement with Chelsea, “And for good reason.  We are not the only two groups that venture around this forest.  Many creatures associate themselves by these trees.  I’m sure Red and Blue mentioned to you that we call the trees light trees.  Other creatures seek the guiding influence of light trees as well.  The different between most other creatures and us, is the fact that other creatures stay hidden very well, no matter their size.”
Boston was listening to Tus speak, but couldn’t look away from the ten scientists.  They were not braking formation staying close together and looking at one of the trees.  One of the scientists had her head on the shoulder of a man and the man looked like he was holder her trying to comfort her.  The longer Boston watched the group the more he realized they weren’t just looking at one tree, they were looking all around them.  The scientists hadn't noticed that Tus, Chelsea and himself had make it to the white tree, they were more concerned with something that was closer to them.  Then, one of the female scientists gave a loud scream.  The scream echoed throughout the entire forest bouncing off every surrounding tree and carrying through the air to every near ear.  As soon as Boston heard the scream he turned his head toward Tus just in time to see him vanish.  Tus didn’t go running away, rather his body became translucent until he was completely gone.  
“Did you see that?”  Chelsea’s question was unclear to Boston whether she was talking about what the scientists saw or that Tus had vanished into thin air.  “Boston, did you see Tus vanish?”
“I knew he had special gifts like Red and Blue told us about, but I didn’t know that was one of them.  We should go see if we can’t help those people.  Something is going on, and it sounds like they are blind scared.”
“Yeah maybe for good reason.  Let’s be careful.”
Chelsea and Boston started running toward the scientists.  The closer they got the more they could hear screams and voices.  The group didn’t move from their original position staying tightly grouped together.  Boston thought he better yell to them that they were coming so it didn’t scare them even more.
“Is everything alright?  Can we help you?”
The group turned to see Chelsea and Boston running over to help.  They didn’t respond, and turned quickly back to surveying the rest of the forest.  Boston and Chelsea arrived to the group and tried to see what it wa they were looking for.  Chelsea tried talking to them.
“What’s happening, is everyone alright?”
One of the scientists spoke without breaking her surveying vision on the forest, “How did you two get here?  The park is not safe right now.  We have lost fifteen of our best scientists.  You should not have come into the park today.”
“What are you looking for?”
“We have been studying these creatures for a few months now.  We just discovered them, but didn’t realize they were so dangerous.”  One of the scientists screams again.  “Look there.”  The lady scientist pointed her finger to one of the larger trees.  Boston looked intently searching the tree for any sign of life.  The words of the scientist rang loud in his mind “creatures, dangerous, we lost fifteen of our best”.  Something was moving close to the top of the tree.  It was hard to see what it was, but it looked dark and thin.  With the shadows resting under every branch and leave, the dark shadows made this creature difficult to distinguish between creature and shade.
“Chelsea, do you see it?  There is something moving close to the top of the tree.”
“No no, look at the bottom of the tree.  See that thin line moving back and forth like a plant being blown in the wind?  I think thats the creature.  Wait, did you say close to the top of the tree?”
Boston followed Chelsea’s vision as she looked higher and higher up the tree.
“I see it.  That’s incredible, this thing must be thirty yards tall or more.  And look how skinny it is, like a flagpole if not more thin.  I haven’t see anything like it before.  Being so dark, it blends into the shade so well, great camouflage.”
The creature swayed back and forth hiding mixed in the shadows of the tree.  Taller than any animal Boston or Chelsea has ever known and thinner than what seemed physically possible the creature displayed intelligence utilizing its surroundings are a benefit to itself.  Boston kept looking around at the other trees.  They were full of these tall creatures.  There was no path away free from the creatures.  
One of the creature that stood directly North of where Boston, Chelsea and the group of scientists had gathered, took a step forward revealing itself completely in the light.  The dark skin didn’t get any lighter in the sun, and Boston couldn’t find any distinguishing marks of a face.  The top of the creature ended without any eyes, mouth, nose, or ears.  The scientists paused all movement looking at the creature in shock.  The female scientist explained to Boston and Chelsea, “We have never seen this before, never do they come out into the sunlight.”  Then at one moment, the rest of the creatures took a step forward revealing themselves as well.  There were hundreds of the creatures.  Boston felt a strange feeling in his feet.  The ground felt like it was shaking.  He remembered Tus, and hoped he was coming.  The skinny creatures started swaying back and forth more now than before.  The swaying became extensive and they would come close to hitting one another.  The creature that first took a step out of the shadows had the initial contact with the neighboring creature.  It swayed more than before and hit the creature to it’s left at their highest point.  The sound was similar to two wooden bats smashing into each other without any indications of a crack.  The loud smack echoed quickly throughout the forest and just as quickly as the sound could be heard, the creatures reacted.  They stopped all swaying and entered into a sprint towards Boston, Chelsea, and the group.  Boston grabbed Chelsea’s hand and took off running.  They could hear behind them terrible sounds from the group of scientists.  Boston could only imagine what was happening.  They ran as fast as possible, but it was impossible to escape the hundreds of creatures that had surrounded them.  Chelsea dove out of the way of one of the creatures that had flung itself toward her like a diving bullet.  The creature missed by inches, and Chelsea got to her feet scrambling to get back her running speed.  Boston ran between the legs of many creatures missing their swinging whoosh and the creature would hurel the leg forward trying to inflict as much damage as possible.  The only advantage Boston and Chelsea had on the creatures was the fact they were much smaller and could maneuver quicker.  They ran and dodged as best they could.  Boston felt himself become extremely tired and knew he had to change course.  On the ground he saw a stick and ran over to it.  He picked up the stick and yelled over to Chelsea, “Find something to fight with.”
Boston found the closest creature to him and as he dodged yet another hurled leg he swung the stick as hard as he could at the creatures leg.  The leg cleanly split into two, breaking so easily Boston fell to the ground expecting some resistance to the swung stick.  Boston was so surprised the leg was broken so easily he stood and watched without any concern of another creature, as the now one legged creature fell swiftly to the ground.  “Chelsea, brake the legs!”
Chelsea looked over to see the creature had fallen.  She grabbed a stick of her own and together with Boston started to bring down the creatures.  The creatures started to change tactic and more of them dove like a spear trying to pierce their flesh.  Things became harder, but Boston and Chelsea brought down many of the creatures.  Time faden in the instinct to survive, after just a few minutes there were no more creatures in sight that were upright.  Boston looked around and over toward Chelsea surprised the war had ended so soon.  He walked over to her and gave her a long hug happy she had survived.
“I have no idea what that was.  I thought there were so many more.  Where did they all go?”  In response to Boston’s question Chelsea pointed a finger suggesting that Boston turnaround.  Boston turned and among the group of scientists he saw Red, Blue, and Tus.  Just behind them he saw the creatures, the majority of them had congregated to that side grouping together to look themselves like a shadow.  Red, Blue, and Tus were walking together toward the tall, skinny creatures, unafraid in demeanor and posture.  The creatures started to advance toward them, in unison the three of them started to sprint toward the creatures.  As Red, Blue, and Tus entered full running speed narrowing the gap between them and the creatures to forty yards, thirty yards, twenty yards; the most miraculous event Boston had ever witnessed took place.  The air started to materialize around the three protectors.  Parts of the air turned into color.  The color was in patches around the protectors at first then it grew upward and horizontally until there were various colors filling the air as high as the creatures and as wide as the open ground in which they were running.  The colors started to take shape of people and quickly filled in as such.  Boston recognized them as protectors seeing each one of them had a different colored hat similar to the one’s worn to Red and Blue.  The rapid materialization of so many protectors in a large wall of people resembled a fierce titlewave moving in one united fluid motion.  The creatures and the protectors collided.  Not one of the protectors was moved backward and the titlewave swallowed up the creatures as the top protectors angled down to engulf the entire group.  Boston could see the protectors carried different weapons with them.  Some had swords, others weapons Boston had never seen before, then there was Blue who carried nothing but his powerful fits.  A loud sound of large bundles of timber being broken at once roared out from among the protectors.  All the creatures had been destroyed in one large desolation.  The protectors that had incredible materialized in unison and acted with such amazing force were gone before any of them touched the ground.  The air returned to its original state and only Tus, Red, and Blue remained standing.
Boston and Chelsea came running over to the rest of the group shouting and cheering for the amazing display of protecting by Tus, Red, and Blue.  When they got to the others, the entire mood and feeling of the scientists was different.  Now they were at easy from the dangerous situation, and at the same time they were completely perplexed.  Being scientists they became asking questions to Tus, Red, and Blue.  Tus responded for them all, “Listen, there are a great number of things of which you nor I know.  The World is changing and quick, yours is the job to work on finding the cure to JEX.  Work hard, I know we can find it.”  Then the three protectors signaled to Boston and Chelsea to come with them and they walked away.
“Thank you so much, to all of you.  That was truly amazing.  I have never seen anything like that.  You guys really are wonderfully great protectors.  Thank you.” 
“I second what Chelsea said, thank you.”
Red put his arm around Tus talking to Boston and Chelsea, “We told you this man was incredible.” 
Tus laughed, “I’m sure glad you told the shadows to group together like that, makes things a lot easier.  Blue, you did great, your strength was unfailing.”
“It’s an honor to protect with you Tus.”
Boston was impressed they knew the name of those creatures.  The protectors knew a lot about the World and what was out there.  It make sense to him since they have to protect against anything that comes for those whom they are protecting.
Tus was thinking out loud, “It was strange, the shadows never do what they did today.  Coming out in the plain light.  How has heard of such things?  They are called the shadows for a reason.”
“That’s what Red and I were talking about just before we met up with you.  We didn’t expect them to openly attack in the daylight.”
“Well I think we know why they were acting so weird”, said Red.
Tus grabbed Red by the arm, “Don’t.”
Boston was listening close, and felt like Red was talking about something he needed to know.  “No, Tus, what is he talking about?”
“Nothing.”
“If its about me, I want to know.”
        Red looked at Tus, “He wants to know.”
        Tus didn’t answer and kept walking.  He knew it would come as hard news to Boston, but knew Red was right, Boston needed to know.  Red stopped walking with Boston and Chelsea so he could explain.
        “You do need to know this Boston, I’m not known for many words when it comes time to tell someone something important.  The shadows were killing those scientists because they had been warned you were in the forest and were trying to kill you.  The shadows were holding back from the scientists until they knew you were among them.”
        Boston’s heart sank, he felt it drop lower and lower without a final resting place.  He felt completely responsible and yet so confused as to what he could have been differently with the knowledge he had to act with.  “That was my fault? How can I go anywhere?  Everyone I associate with is in danger!  We can’t go around the World visiting places where this can happen again and again.  This is not right.”
        Chelsea put her hand up to Red before he could speak.  She took Boston by the hand and walked with him following Tus and Blue who had gained quite the distance on them. As they walked Chelsea tried to comfort Boston.
        “I don’t know what to do now Chelsea.  I can’t go back home, I could draw danger to my family and friends.  If I keep going danger will come to anyone we meet.”
        “Boston, this has already been a crazy adventure.  None of this would happen unless you really had something important to do.  Why else would so many people be using so much of their time?  I came on this adventure and will continue on this adventure with you because I have fallen in love with you.  You're so much fun, and very smart.  Your family is so nice to me.  I love the way you treat people and want to help others.”
        Boston immediately felt more strength listening to Chelsea.  She was strong in what she knew was right.  “I love you too Chelsea.  I have for a long time now.”
        Boston and Chelsea stopped walking and for a moment in Henderson park, deep into the forest as the sun was setting lower and lower they felt comfort and joy knowing that what they wanted was here in front of them.  They kissed for the first time.  Red who was walking behind them stopped when they did.  He couldn’t pass up this opportunity to give them a hard time. 
 “Oh Chelsea, you obviously didn’t see how many shadows I took out today.  Boston only took down a few, but hey love is a mysterious thing.”  He kept walking by carrying a big grin on his face as he passed.  Boston and Chelsea laughed, and kept walking.
“You know Boston, you really do have something very important to do.”
“So do you Chels, you're here just like me.”
“I’m excited to see what else comes along, though I hope we make it through alive.  On our adventure, this task though we don’t know exactly what it is; must be done.  The leaves follow you Boston.  Red and Blue said there are legends about that person, about you.  So this task must be done.  It is not your fault there are people who do bad things.  We have to do our best, we can’t hide away from everyone based on the actions of other people.  We will be smart about what we do, but we really must go on and complete this mission.  The good will always win out.  We cannot change who we are, you cannot change who you are which is a good thing because you’re needed as you are.  To hid that or to try and change who you would be insane.  The bad needs to change not the good.  And along the way I’m sure we will change, but for the better and that is best.”
“You're absolutely right Chelsea.”  Boston and Chelsea followed Tus, Red, and Blue who lead them the short distance back to the white tree.  Tus thanked Red and Blue who then vanished away before their eyes.  
“That is truly amazing how you guys can do that.”
“You too can learn Boston.  Once you know how to do it, well you do it.  I will try and teach you, but it takes years for people to learn.  In fact some people never learn it fully so they can never disperse themselves into the air.”
“I would love to learn.”
“Great.  For now let set up camp for the night.  We are running out of light.  Camping by the white tree will be more safe than any other place in this forest.”  Tus started gathering wood and shrubs to build a shelter.  Boston went with him to gather more as Chelsea started building with what they had.
“I assume then Boston that you will be coming with us for the long haul, is that right?  Traveling around the World.”
“Both Chelsea and I are in, yes.”  As Boston said yes he remembered his parents and their hope that he would try finding one of the doors in Henderson park first then make the decision, and that is exactly what happened.  Now that they have had the experience of fighting off the shadows, and now that Boston knew about his magnetic pull of opposition to all those within a four mile radius of himself, Boston knew they must continue forward wherever that was.
“Great.  I know we can do it.  I know we can follow the leaves and complete the task they have for us.”
“Me too.”  
Boston and Tus finished gathering the shelter supplies and started helping Chelsea build their fortress.  The night was approaching quick and dusk had settled in.  The last rays of sunlight trickled through the light trees.  The leaves seemed to stick to the sunlight not wanting to let it go by without capturing every last photon.  The sky was starting to reveal the beautiful stars in all their constellations and bright masses of mystery.  They continued to build the shelter next to the white tree.  The ground was well kept by the Henderson family allowing the shelter to be constructed on level ground and in an open area.  The closest tree to the white light tree was more than fifty yards away, then the trees surrounded the white tree in formation of a border, still no trees touched each other.  
Upon finishing the shelter they took a step back and looked at the creation.  It was admittedly smaller than they all had thought it would be, but neither of them had any intention of sleeping outside of the shelter.  As Tus started to put some of his things inside the small hut they all heard the sound of movement.  
“Sounds like the shadows again.  Get ready.”  Tus started to disappear.
“Tus, it sounds like a lot more than just the shadows, what else is coming?”  Boston couldn’t ask his question before Tus was gone.  Chelsea and Boston tried to see what was making the noises but the night had settled in and the trees stood as pillars for creatures to hide behind.
“Boston lets get in the shelter, I don’t know what else we can do.”
        They quickly got inside the small shelter hoping to get out of sight.  The noises were getting closer by the moment.  Soon they heard great cracking noises behind them closer than any other noise.  They sat in silence avoiding any attention to them.  Boston wondered if Tus had started to unleash some plan to protect them.  Then the shelter went totally black.  Any source of light from the stars or anywhere else was shut out completely.  Simultaneously the shelter shook and started to fall apart, but zero light penetrated Boston and Chelsea.  They felt themselves lifting off the ground and moving away from the now louder noises from the forest.  The speed at which they were moving accelerated until Boston and Chelsea, along with the wrecked shelter were expelled from the cap of darkness onto a wooden floor.  Instantly Boston sensed where they were.  They were inside the white light tree.  
        The next morning Boston woke up to see Chelsea visually exploring their new location.
“Boston do you know where we are?  This place is beautiful.”
        Boston sat up and stood brushing off the rubble of the shelter that was so easily broken.  He felt warm.  The outside was not cold, but now as Boston looked around this room he wondered how would feel so warm.  The warmth penetrated deep into his body going through one side and out the other.  There was white light being emitted from the wooden trunk of the tree.  Boston could see they were in the heartwood of the tree, it was hollow.  Whether done by men or naturally occurring Boston couldn’t tell.  They stood on flat ground of wood similar to a shelf about half way up the tree and exactly in the middle of its diameter.  The room inside the tree perplexed Boston most, he hadn’t imagined the trunk to be so thick, nor the height at which the room was displaying.  The white light looked to have substance, Boston’s arm automatically reached out to touch the light.  The light swirled slightly and continued upward as it came out of the trunk.  As the light ascended most of it would collect together at what looked like another wood platform.  It was much higher than where they stood, but the levelness and the fact it stuck out of the side like the wood upon which they stood, made Boston believe it was another  platform.  The room smelled sweet reminding Boston of the smell of a ripe nectarine.  Boston walked over to the edge of the platform and looked over, he could see a large pool of water.  It was very deep extending well below ground level.  It reminded Boston of Zuthiss and how they survive off the water stored in the light trees.  
        “We are inside of the white light tree.  This is amazing, I wonder if Tus did this.”
        “That’s right, and maybe.  Look at the light coming out of the wood.  It’s like a vapor or something.”  Chelsea held her arm out and let the light pass by it.  “I didn’t think this place was possible to get into.”
        “What do you mean, have you heard of this place before?”
        “My parents would tell me stories about presenting yourself to the white tree.  They always said that first you present yourself outside the tree, and you’re accepted the tree will allow you to come inside where you’ll learn great things.  Things about your mission or task they want you to do, things about science you didn’t think was possible, and things you didn’t expect.  Somehow, you and I are inside the great white light tree.  We have been accepted inside.  My parents said this story is a dieing one turning into a myth since no one in the past many years has had the experience of going into the tree.  Before, back in the day everyone tried to make it in.  There were people who snuck out to the tree at night and tried to find a way inside the tree, but never could find a way in.  Some radicals even brought explosives to a presenting.  After the tree not responding to them one of the men took out the explosives and tried to lite it.  Luckily the men were stopped by others before the explosive could be lite.  Eventually after years of no one getting inside the tree, stories started emerging about how the tree showed them many great things and it never took them inside.  These stories spread quick, and people believe the whole tree taking you inside was a myth.  Now you don’t even hear about it, it’s all about presenting outside these days.  I have always believed my parents and knew the tree would take us inside.  This was not Tus’s work, the tree has accepted us.”
        “I have never heard that story, but I believe your parents too.  Did they say anything about how to get out from the tree?”
        “Good question.  I feel so warm and good I don’t think I ever want to leave.”
        “I know, I feel that same warm feeling.  But we don’t have any food, I wonder if the tree will let us out.”
        Boston and Chelsea looked around so more and felt the side of the trunk they could touch.  The other side of the trunk was inaccessible since the platform didn’t extend to the other side, it only brought them to the middle where there was nothing but the white light floating around.  Since the platform was just wide enough for them to walk around, they couldn’t feel the other sides of the trunk either.  As Boston touched the wood of the trunk where they would get to, he fully expected to feel the normal wood texture and hardness, but this was different.  The wood was very warm like they had been feeling, and the wood was reasonably stretchy.  Boston pushed his finger into the wood and got it in half an inch before the wood resisted his finger from going further.  Boston looked over at Chelsea who was discovering the same thing with the wood.
        “How unusual is this?”
        “Guess it’s not the same wood that we know, Boston did you push a button or something?  We are moving.”
        Boston felt the wooden platform starting to raise up toward the upper platform.  It accelerated and they started to raise quickly, then the platform moved along the trunk toward the other side of the room.  The wood was moving them, positioning them to a different spot.
        “Hang on Chelsea, I don’t know what I did, but we are definitely moving!”
        The platform came to an abrupt stop well higher than before and on the opposite side of the room.  Boston could see now the other platform was not much higher than them.  He couldn’t see the top or what was on it, but he felt there was something there.  
“Boston look at the trunk of the tree now.”
“It looks like the wood is moving.”
“Yeah, maybe it’s time to leave?”
“We are very high up, I don’t think we are going anywhere.”
“Neither do I.  It’s making a hole, I think, yeah that’s the outside.”
The wood morphed before Boston and Chelsea’s eyes.  It moved creating a hole to the outside world.  Chelsea tried putting her hand through the hole was wasn’t able to.  The hole was being protected by some force field or glass substance where they would see out but couldn’t go through the hole.  They both put their faces together to see out the hole, see what the tree wanted to show them.
The outside was light with some shadows on the ground and bushes.  It looked like a beautiful day, a day Boston and Chelsea hoped Tus was alive in.  He was never taken into the tree left to face whatever those things were coming toward them last night.  The day was inviting, and pleasant, overall a happy place.  Boston hasn’t realized how beautiful the landscape and surroundings were until this moment.
The platform suddenly moved again.  This time it dropped very low in the tree carrying them along with it.  It rotated around the trunk only slightly and at what Boston guessed to be ground level just about the pool of water, the platform stopped and the wood started to morph again.  The hole it created this time was much larger allowing Boston and Chelsea a large view outside.  
As Boston and Chelsea looked through the force field type of hole, they could see a stunning path before them.  The path looked as though it went on forever.  The path was not wide nor did it look to be used often.  There were some patches of grass in the middle of the path and some flowers showing that it didn’t acquire high traffic daily.  They were memorized by this spectacular view, not saying a word and taking it all in, from the dark brown dirt of the path to the bright flowers on the sides and some in the middle of the trail.  The path even had good shade to enjoy a comfortable walk.  As their eyes worked their way up the path seeing more and more, they saw at the top of their vision two figures walking toward them.  The figures moved very slow, and neither figure was tall but looked quite short about three feet tall.  Boston and Chelsea watched in amazement as the figures got closer into distinguishable distance.  Boston thought to himself, are these more creatures of the forest?  Surely these are no human beings.  The way they look and walk they had to be creatures, but what?  Why is the White light tree showing us these things?
The creatures continued toward Boston and Chelsea, and as they did their true characters were easily identified.
“Boston, do you see what I am seeing?  That looks like a fox and a porcupine walking together.”
Boston looked closely not believing his own eyes.  He saw one of the creatures was taller than the other by only a few inches.  The taller one looked just like a fox, with it’s white chest, brilliant red-orange fur everywhere else, and the pointed ears.  The shorter one had the white tipped quills all over the body with underlying black color, and the eyes were little black beady syphers.  That was a porcupine.  They both were walking  together side by side down the beautiful path.  Boston though back to his biology classes learning about the fox.  He recalled that some foxes will hunt and eat porcupines.  How then are these two walking together as though they are friends?  Looking at the animals pondering this question Boston noticed something much more peculiar.  The fox and porcupine were talking to each other.  He could see their mouths moving and their heads nodding to show agreeance and that one heard the other.  As perplexed by this as Boston was he knew Chelsea was seeing the same thing so he didn’t say a word to her instead he listened to what appeared to be a very interesting conversation.
“Like I was telling you Tom, those deer don’t watch out for us porcupines one bit.  Just last week alone there were five of us trampled by a herd that “thought” they heard hunters.  Luckily those injured will all be alright, we won’t lose them to the deer.  What am I to say to my fellow porcupines about to be trampled, don’t use your quills?  It’s in our nature, like an uncontrollable response.  Those quills don’t come out very easy but the deer will figure it out.”
The fox walked listening and laughing to the porcupine’s stories. Boston could see he was carrying some flowers in his hand, they were very unique with a magnificent color of purple covering the whole of it.  
 “You know Gil, we have walked this path to the White light tree for ten years together three times a year.  It might just be me, but this time feels different.  There is something different about the forest, like we are being watched or as if there is something missing.  Do you have the same feeling?”
“Yes I do, and have been feeling that way for the past few weeks.  Have you noticed all the creatures who are running together?”
“Oh yes, they tried recruiting my family, but us foxes cannot join, I refuse to join them.”
“They actually stopped to talk to your family?  They run on by me and my family without a glimpse of consideration.  Do they think we are of no use?  These quills are sharp, just ask the deer how sharp they are.”
“I don’t know Gil, the creatures are stirred up more than I have ever seen before.  I’m afraid the time has come.”
“The time?  Oh, are you sure?”
“Yes, maybe the tree will guide us different but I feel sure of it.”
“I think you’re right Tom, the time has come that the leaves follow, and we must do the same.  I wish I could see who or what the leaves are following.  I only hope the one the leaves are following knows what to do.”
“I’m sure he will.”
“Yeah.  So how are things for you?  Still can’t grow that reddish fur on your chest I see.”
“We will have all the red and orange we need.”
“Are we sure we want to do that?”
“You’re the one who said you saw it take in one of those deer.  You know nobody can get in the White tree, so we are left with no other option.”
“It will be the ultimate sacrifice.”
The formed window started to close back up, and the view of the fox and porcupine was taken away.  Boston stood there knowing very well there were talking about him and wondered what they meant when they said they hoped he would know what to do.  What was he supposed to do, find the cities underground?
“So that’s what the tree wanted us to see.  Don’t worry Boston, you’ll know what to do eventually.  I’m sure of it.”
They sat down on the platform and put their feet in the water which was still just inches from the platform.  Boston thought there could be some creature in these waters as well, but decided not to worry about it this time and put his feet in.  The water was warm and felt good.  Surprisingly neither Boston nor Chelsea felt hungry.  They talked for a long time sitting on the platform without anything happening inside the tree.  Boston thought over and over again about the fox and porcupine’s conversation.  He was grateful the tree had showed him the conversation.  Now he wondered what it was he needed to do, and how so many others knew about the prophecy of the leaves following someone, which was apparent from the past few days this someone was him.  Boston linded over and laid on his back.  In a random impulse he let out a yell.  The yell echoed all the way up to the top of the tree.  
“This would be a great place for a concert.” said Chelsea.
Boston was still on his back looking at the upper platform of the tree and said, “Great acoustics.”  As he said those words he saw at the upper platform a human head poke over the side and quickly dip back out of sight.  The image at first frightened Boston, then it gave him great hope, maybe this person knew the way out of the tree.
“Chelsea!  I just saw someone at that other platform.  I saw their head look over the side at us then the person pulled it back.”
“Are you sure your eyes weren’t playing tricks on you?”
“I’m sure.  We are not alone in this tree.”




Boston started to get a plethora of ideas of how they would try and reach this person or how they would try and communicate with him or her, but before he could act on any of them they were both encompassed by the side of the trunk.  It happened so fast they didn’t have time to react much more than involuntary movements at the mercy of the tree.  The morphic wood enclosed them in a ball.  The platform was still there but they were moving together with the ball into the trunk of the tree.  The ball was great protection and they passed through the trunk with ease.  The ball was lowered near the ground by the outer branches of the tree.  Boston and Chelseas were let out of the wooden ball and they comfortably landed on the ground expelled from the tree.  They watched as the wooden ball returned back into the trunk rejoining the wood as though nothing had happened.
“Wow, what happened?”
“Not sure.  Do you think that happened because I saw that person?”
“Maybe, wow.”
Boston looked around trying to access how long they had been in the Great White Tree.  “What time is it?”
“Looks like the sun just went down, just there in the West.”
“You're right, we were in the White tree for almost an entire day.”
“And you were a lot safer in there then you would have been out here, glad you two are alive.”
Tus had appeared next to them.  He didn’t look like he got one second of rest through the night and day.
“Tus, its so good to see you.  Before we knew what was happening, the White tree engulfed us in this wooden ball and took us inside the trunk.  What was it like out here?”
“Imagine the shadows, then times that by twenty.  Very strange creatures were out here that I haven’t seen in many years.  Somehow they knew exactly where you two were, but because you were in the great white tree they couldn’t do a thing to get you.  No creature, nor human for that matter can get in that tree except by the tree’s choosing.  As soon as Red, Blue, and I saw all the creatures gathering around the great White tree we knew you and Chelsea were inside.  Like I said, no creature can get inside the tree, but that doesn’t mean they don’t try.  We watched them for a few minutes construct plans to get in, but they all failed; the tree wasn’t even damaged.  After we watched for a few minutes, we got some reinforcements and took out as many of those things as we could.”
“Will they keep following us?”  Chelsea asked so sincerely that Tus couldn’t response in any sarcastic form at all.
“Yes they will, but as you can see, you will be protected.  You're not invincible, but you are greatly protected.  And after being in the Great White tree I’m sure you have been taught powerful things to help you.”
“Yes.  So Tus, are you sure nobody can get into the tree themselves?”
“Positive Boston.”
“When we were inside there was a platform underneath us, for us to stand on.  Above us we saw another higher platform.  At some moment I looked up and from the edge of the higher platform I saw someones head peeking over.  As soon as they saw I noticed them, the head pulled back out of sight.  Who was that, do you know?”
As Boston recounted this story to Tus, he saw a dramatic change in Tus’ character.  He went from being pleased from having met up with some good friends, to entering into a great ponder and concern.  Boston could see Tus just recieved very bad news.
“Boston are you sure there was another platform?  Did you actually see a person in the upper part of the tree?”
Tus’ concern transferred to Boston and all he could do was nod yes.
Tus put his hands together to direct his voice and yelled, “Red, Blue.”  They appeared immediately.  Tus told them what Boston had just explained to him and added, “We need to get to Grebes now!”




























Boston felt a jolt shaking his seat, the airplane had just landed waking him up from the long flight to the edge of the country.  Tus said they needed to get to the Norg ocean and meet up with Barrus, and he meant it.  They had left directly from the Great White tree in Chesterville’s Henderson park the very night Boston and Chelsea got out of the White tree.  Tus didn’t stop for food, water, or sleep.  They traveled continuously driving long hours to the airport then traveling on multiple planes to get to the great Norgic ocean.  Now as they were landing Boston was more grateful than ever to have Chelsea at his side.  This was much newer land than the deepest parts of Henderson park.  He was glad to have a familiar face with him, at his side.  
They stepped off the plane and headed over to get their luggage.  The advertisements were similar to those Boston was used to seeing at Wellington College.  ‘Price Science, the future.’  ‘Can you solve JEX?’  ‘Have you seen me? (With a photo of a missing person)’  The posters with missing people were mostly from families who haven’t heard from siblings or children working for Price Science.  These posters were all over in every city.  Most people would ignore the posters figuring them to be a crude way to get family members who wouldn’t contact the family to notice they were missed.  Unfortunately just the majority of posters were people who went and worked for Price Science, not all, so missing people rarely turned up.  There were always little groups teaming up to “get” Price Science.  They were almost always planning an attack of some sort, a break in, to get their family members back.  Many of these groups failed since the police actively watched for this kind of violence and rebellion.  Though every once in a while the public would get word about a group attacking the facilities of Price Science.  The group would usually destroy all they could while searching for the missing members of their families and the families around the World.  Never has any group found one missing person from these raids, which is likely the reason the small groups have begun to fizzle out.  Now many parents have become micawbers though now so much poor in the wealth of worldly things rather poor in spirit.  One of the only things giving Price Science affected communities hope was the fact that reported missing persons has steadily decreased in percentages for the past few years.  Many believe it is because Price Science doesn’t want any more trouble and thus the small group warriors are heros.  Other believe they are planning something even more disturbing and want to lay low for a while before exposing their true self.  Either way, Boston hoped to see all missing person’s returned to their true homes.
 After Lilly’s death Boston was much more aware of the posters feeling more connected to them.  He would try memorizing the faces in case he ran into one of these “missing” people, then he could tell them to please contact their family and tell them how much they are missed.  Chelsea too would take the postes seriously, though she didn’t have anyone in her immediate family go away working and cut off contact, she knew many families who have.
After Boston, Chelsea, and Tus got their bags they got into a rented car.  They only needed a small vehicle with good gas mileage since they hardly brought anything with them.  Tus was paying for everything, and they rushed so fast to the airport that neither Boston nor Chelsea had time to pack a thing.  
It wasn’t until they were driving in the car for a few minutes that Boston remembered the phone Aldo had given him before he left home.  They must have knew I wouldn’t be back for some time, or at least they were preparing, thought Boston.  He reached into his pocket and dialed home, then quickly hung the phone up.  He had seen too many movies where they “bad guys” would trace their location through the phone, but could they trace text messages?  Boston thought, either way I need to communicate with my family, I can’t leave like the others and have no communication.  Boston typed out a text message:  MOM DAD, ADVENTUROUS TIMES IN HENDERSON PARK, WE ARE OKAY.  TUS SAID WE NEED TO GET TO GREBES AND QUICK.  WE ARE ALMOST TO THE NORG OCEAN, BEAUTIFUL AREA WITH A LOT OF POSTERS OF “MISSING PEOPLE.”  SORRY I JUST LEFT, WE HAD TO GO QUICK, CHELSEA IS WITH ME.  LOVE BOSTON.  Almost instantly Boston got a new message back, it was from Milly:  WE UNDERSTAND, WE LOVE YOU, GOOD LUCK! BE CAREFUL.  It felt good to finally communicate with his parents and let them know what he was doing.  He looked over at Chelsea who was looking out the window.
“Hey, I have a phone that my parents gave me.  Do you want to send a message to your parents?”
Chelsea’s face lite up and she reached out for the phone.  “I would love to.  I can’t believe you have a phone.  Thanks Boston.”  She was immediately sending messages to her family and getting many messages back.
Tus slowed the car to find a parking place.  Boston hadn’t realized they were so close to the coast and their destination.  He looked out the window to see the Norg ocean but saw the ocean at a great distance away.  “Tus is this our stop?  The ocean is still quite far away.”
“On the coast of Wyet you only have one spot to board ships.  You would walk for miles on either side of this spot and never find another area for boarding.  This spot is famous and avoided by many people, but seeing as how we can’t fly in a plane or drive to Grebes, this is our only option.”  Tus parked the car.  “Have you never heard of this place?”
“Not really, no.  What’s it called?”
“Fast living port.  Because if your ship or boarders to the ship are slow, you won’t be living.”
Boston and Chelsea looked at each other.  Chelsea shook her head signifying that she hadn’t heard of the place either.  “What does that mean Tus?”  
“It means Chelsea, that we need to be fast.  You’ll see, come on we don’t want to be late.”
They all grabbed their bags and started walking down a paved path leading to the edge of a cliff.  The area was beautiful and made Boston wonder why so many avoided the area, though he had a feeling it was the if your slow your dead part.  On either side of the paved path there were colorful flowers and green grass and plants.  They were not the only ones walking.  Boston saw hundreds of people walking down other paths all leading to one destination, the edge of a cliff.  The cliff curved around making a semicircle then tapered back flat to the ocean, but this pocket of the coast not only dipped inland it dropped the half mile down to sea level.  Boston could see the sides of fast and living port since they were in the middle furthest back location in the semicircle.  It was as if a giant with a giant shovel walked up to the coast line and put the shovels edge where the water was crashing into the cliff’s side, then at the sea level he pushed the shovel into the cliff going half a mile back and removed the earth leaving the water the ability to just go over the lowered edge.  There was no beach, the ocean was very deep all the way to its edge.  Boston began to wonder how this could possibly be the best place to board a ship.  Boston assumed the rest of the coast was like here, being extremely steep cliffs and much higher than the actual ocean making boarding a ship impossible, therefore Tus must have a trick up his sleeve about this place..  But, this pocket they were in wasn’t just high above the sea level, it was half a mile back from the shore.  
They arrived at the edge of the cliff overlooking the fast living port.  Chelsea took a step forward and looked over the edge of the cliff.
“Careful there Chelsea, many people have been impatient and jumped too soon.”
“What do you mean jumped?  What were they jumping to?”  Chelsea looked down and saw the horrible site of hundreds of wrecked ships on the rocky bottom.  The ships were shattered and broken beyond repair.  Chelsea didn’t look too long not wanted to see the poor sailors who died along with the wrecked ship.
“Like I said, this is the best place to board a ship, if you're fast.  See the ocean there, take a close look, do you see a beach?”
Boston looked closer trying to find a sandy beach like most shorelines.  He didn’t see any sand again.  As he turned back to Tus Boston not notice all the people there with them.  Hundreds of people had come to fast living port.  They were all standing near the cliffs edge as if they were waiting for something to happen.  The people lined along all of the semicircles perimeter.  “No Tus I don’t see a sandy shore.”
“There’s not a sandy shore.  The ocean stays very deep up against these cliffs.  Deep enough for ships to sail right up to the edge of the water.”  Tus’s eyes gazed off toward the ocean readying himself for a spectacular event.
Boston too turned and watched the oceans edge.  Sure enough there appeared something, it was a smaller ship.  The ship came right to the edge of the water and would rise and fall up and down with the large waves.  It had a magically smooth posture in the waves not having it’s position changed much by the much larger waves.  Somehow the ship was being maneuvered perfectly.  The ship was like an old pirate ship, the wood painted white.  There was a white sail that flew in the wind, and from fast living port the ship appeared to have a maximum capacity to hold eight people.  It stayed there in waiting position staying pointed toward all the people on fast living port.  Then came the rest of the ships.  There were some twice many three times the size of the first ship, large and powerful.  The ships sailed in in hurds, coming almost all at once and quickly lining up on one another’s side all facing toward the people who were patiently waiting.  All the ships were similar to the first smaller ship as far as having the pirate style make.  Though Boston got an unsettling feeling looking over the ships.  Some had many men on deck lining the ships perimeter.  The men were hard to see but they stood motionless looking at other ships as they got into position.  Other ships pulled up wooden windows exposing holes into the ship, inside those holes Boston would only guess held cannons and many other weapons.  The ships looked like they were preparing for a battle, not just getting ready to pick up a few passengers.  The smaller ship looked helpless.
“Now that the ships are in position, we all wait for the rise.  This is always an interesting time since there are so many rival ships that come to this port.  There have been much foul play during the rise, sometimes resulting in the other ship not making it out nor the crew.  I don’t know why so many people like to war hear during the rise.  The rise is when the ocean surges the water up.  The water will rise the half mile up the cliffs to our level.  But if you look at the ships now, they are being tossed up and down at the oceans mercy, no one can board the ships that way.  When the water rises that’s the way the ships would bounce at any other spot along the coast.  At fast and living port when the ocean rises it creates stabilization and allows the ships a smooth ride in to the edge where we are, that’s when we get on our ship.  Be very quick though, we don’t want to be like those down there who weren’t fast enough to make it out  before the water dropped back down to sea level.  The water moved very fast so if your ship hits any of those rocky below it will tear the bottom to shreds.  Or of course their rivals got to them.  See those two larger ships out there?  The one that has all the red flags is from Juta, and the one with all the black painted wood on the ship is from the land of Vold.  Those are the ships we want to avoid, they always try to destroy one another which is why they bring such large ships.”
“So, Tus which one is our ship.”  Boston could see so many ships lined up he wanted to be sure he jumped for the right one.
“Remember that first ship, the smaller one?  Well, that’s our ship.”
“The small one….”  Chelsea’s voice was telling of what Boston was thinking.  Jumping to that small ship would be much more difficult than they hoped, plus it didn’t offer much protection..  “Hope Barrus finds us quick, amongst all these other people.”
Boston saw the water start to rise.  “Chelsea look, its happening.”  
The water rose slowly at first, and all the ships held back waiting for the perfect time to shoot forward as fast as possible with their sails up and ready.  The water came rushing in the cove and crashed into the back.  Then the water level started to rise significantly.  All the ships shot forward, the smaller white ship was leading the pack being much faster than the rest.  Tus shot a flare into the air and the white ship adjusted it course toward the flare.  Tus shot another flare off.  Now the water had risen half way up the cliff of fast and living port.  The white ship was more than halfway to Tus, Boston, and Chelsea, but the other ships where only a quarter or less in the semicircle.  
The ships were changing course constantly going to where others were sending off different colored flared to signal their ship.  Boston saw a red flare get sent off and the ship from Juta changed course toward its flare.  Then a black flare launched into the air, it was right next to the red flare.  Boston felt his heart drop a little knowing both ships would be next to each other which meant war.  The ship from Vold changed course.  The two large ships sailed next to each other for a while racing to the passengers.  
Now the water was close to the top, and the white ship captained by Barrus was in great position almost ready for them to board.  Barrus poked his head out of a window, “Good afternoon, we ready for a ride?”
Tus smiled back at Barrus, “Ready when you are my friend.”
The ship was positioned close to the edge and they all jumped aboard, the moment the got on the ships sails were pulled up to the top by two sailors and the ship darted for the ports opening.  The water levels were holding for now.  Boston looked over at the two larger ships who were just getting to their passengers who when on board quickly got inside the ship.  The moment they got what they needed, Juta shot some bullet out of the dark window in the side of the ship.  Vold’s ship turned immediately sideways and all wooden windows opened and fired at the same time.  Juta’s ship rocked on its side then was hit by a second shot from Vold, it hit Juta with such force the ship tipped completely over upside down.  
“Tus look, Juta’s ship!”
“Oh, don’t worry Boston, Vold usually does that to Juta’s ships.  Now Juta designs their ships to be able to sail upside down.  They are fine, just lost this battle.”
Barrus sailed them out of the port as the water levels now started to fall.  Boston notice both Vold and Juta made it out of the port along with all the other ships, but as the water fell back down and exposed all the wrecked ships Boston knew this was no simple task to be take lightly.
The ship sailed out into the ocean as the other ships went there way as well.  When the ship was in good calm water Barrus came out from the captain’s navigation room and called for the two crewmen who were helping him.  To Boston and Chelsea’s surprise, Red and Blue came out from the ships downstairs.  They had big smiles and were happy to see Boston and Chelsea.
“Welcome to the fastest ship of Grebes, the White Hawk.”  Barrus was a small man in height and weight both.  He wore all white clothes and even had a white beard.  He was the perfect fit for the White Hawk.  
Tus walked over and gave Barrus a big hug.  They were obviously good friends.. “Good to see you my friend.  Good to see your still alive.”
“Well of course I am.  Come downstairs and have some food.”
They all went downstairs and sat at a large table.  There was food everywhere, but as Boston looked beyond the food he was stunned to discover he could see out the ships walls.  The walls were actually see through.  He saw the water moving by the ship, and some fish swim by.  The floor as well restricted no vision from the depths of the sea.  Barrus could see the amazement of Boston’s face.
“Allows me to know what’s coming even when I’m down here.  I’m sure Tus has told you about the people of Quen, has he not?”  
Tus answered himself, “No I haven’t yet told them.  There is a lot I haven’t yet told him about the cultures and peoples of the World.”
“If I may, the people of Quen make this wood you’re seeing now.”
Chelsea turned quickly from the extraordinar walls, “I’ve heard of the people of Quen, my Mother would tell me about the wood you can see through, but only from one side.  That way you can disguise it from anyone who would want to take it from you.  I didn’t think it was a true story at first, but one year my Dad came home from a long trip and brought back a small piece of wood made by the people of Quen.  They work almost their entire lives to get the wood to do this.  It’s amazing, I love it.”
“That’s right.  In fact each person that lives in the Quen area gets a large chunk of wood, large enough to build entire ships from if they want, and that piece of wood is all they get.  Years go by and slowly the Quen people train the wood to get in order, all the grain running the same way, or running all opposite depending on what they want the wood to do.  When its finished many Quen people cut the wood up and sell the pieces.  There are rare cases that they keep the wood together and will only sell it whole.  I was able to get these few boards from Vold, you know those people can be very nice if you’re nice to them.  Anyway the advantage to having the wood is not only the fact you can see through on one side, but it’s extremely strong and light which makes for a fast ship,  This becomes especially important when you have large heavy workers like read and blue.”
Red laughed, “Blue is much heavier.  It’s so good to see you guys.  Not that we weren’t watching.  As soon as Tus said we needed to get to Grebes we contacted Barrus to be his workers while you all were on the ship.  This way we can be even better protectors.”
“Thanks Red and Blue, Boston and I really do appreciate it.”
“Yes we do, thank you both.”
“Well have a seat, enjoy the food.”
“So Barrus, how do you know Tus?”
“A wonderful question Boston, I used to transport Tus and his elephant around to different places.”
The room fell silent as all eyes turned to Tus to see what he would say.  He kept eating and didn’t even look up.
“You have see the elephant haven’t you Boston?”
“Yes I have.”
“I figured you had, though I know of no one else who has see the animal.”
“Didn’t you just say you have?”
“Oh, no.  I transported it surely since the beast is always near Tus in one form or another mostly I assume the animal goes invisible.  I know this ship very well Boston.  If an extra shoe is placed anywhere on the ship I would notice based on the ships performance.  Don’t you think I noticed an elephants weight?”
“You must have.”
“You’re right I did.  Tus never talks about it, but by this alone I know the beast is around.  Don’t get confused though, I like to have the elephant on board.  It’s good luck.”
Tus laughed, “Barrus, you were always wise.”
They talked and ate until it was night.  The feast was perfect and the stories between Tus, Barrus, Red, and Blue were some Boston always hoped to remember.  They were such great people Boston found himself hoping them the best in all they did.  Boston was so happy to be having these experiences with Chelsea.  If it were just him the events wouldn’t of have such a deep effect, there would have been something missing not allowing him to fully enjoy the adventures.  She was the perfect companion.  
The ship sailed on into the night.  Barrus had gone upstairs talking to Tus while Red and Blue were out working on deck.  Boston and Chelsea stayed below talking.  They would see out the walls of the White Hawk.  The night sky was amazing, the stars were bright and not only shone down to the earth but reflected off the water. Some light penetrated into the sea from the moon.  
“Boston, Chelsea come on up, you two will want to see this.”  It was the voice of Barrus.
Boston and Chelsea ran upstairs and looked the direction the ship was traveling.  The night sky was so clear and the moon so bright they could see so well that they had arrived at Grebes.  There were hundreds of ships all floating on the water grouped together.  They had sailed into a lagoon where the water was calm, it was like being on the ground having no waves swaying the boat yet they were still a mile or so out from land.  The ships had lights all around and everything was well lite.  People were out walking around, there was beautiful music coming from one of the inner ships.  People were laughing and having a good night out and about walking on little wooden paths the people had created enabling they to walk from ship to ship with ease.
“The city of ships.”  Barrus had said it with great affection in his voice.
“Its beautiful.”  Boston leaned over and gave Chelsea a kiss.
They sailed around the side of the city of ships and docked with one of the outermost ships connecting themselves with the city.  Some people on the already connected ship helped tie the White Hawk up with Grebes.  They all recognized Barrus, he was evidently famous to the people there.  
“Welcome back Barrus!”
“Good to see your safe and home!”
“Do come over and talk Barrus, good to have you back.”
The greetings were not just to Barrus as he lead the group from the White Hawk to the inner parts of the city, but the people readily recognized Tus as he walked behind Barrus.  They too would greet him, but in a different tone and respect.  The way you would talk to someone who was a great protector as he was.
“Tus, its a honor to have you come to Grebes.”
“Welcome Tus.  Please let us know if you need anything.”
It was apparent that the people loved both these men.  Red and Blue stayed behind at the ship getting things packed away, but as soon as they passed by there were many people who walked back to the White Hawk to talk to Red and Blue.
Boston and Chelsea received different greetings altogether, some people starring at them with questions in their mind, others yelling things like, “Well done boy, well done”, “Grebes is here for you both.”  Boston knew some were nervous he would bring bad things to the city just like to those scientist the shadows attacked.  He didn’t blame them, only hoped they would be safe during his visit.
It wasn’t a long walk to get to the inner ships were Barrus was leading them.
“I’m taking you to the captain of Grebes, her name is Talia, Talia Yarsia.”
As they walked Boston noticed many people gathering to the inner city of ships as they were.  A surprising many people flowed over the ships as they anticipated extraordinary news from Barrus and Tus.  It was apparent by the greetings Boston and Chelseas were receiving, that these people knew who they were, they knew the leaves followed Boston.  After a few minutes more of walking across boarded paths between ships and over small cravasses falling down into the ocean’s lagoon where Grebes was established; they had finally arrived at the innermost part of the city.  It was here that Boston first noticed a path leading out of the city, or in depending on the need.  The path was clear of any ships, unusual for the city which was patterned by the ship to be in a rotating circle growing outward as more ships were added on the outer edge continuing the circular formation.  This path lead to the heart of the city, a smooth path of sailable water for a ship to enter.  At the center they had kept about fifty yards in diameter open, then ships surrounded the rest.  The water in the middle of the city was peculiar in itself.  As they had sailed here from Norg ocean the water was a deep blue color, now as Boston looked at the water surrounded by pirate looking ships it appeared purple.  Though hard to distinguish between a little ripple of the water and something actually floating in it- it being night, Boston thought we could see small flowers on the surface of the water.
“The heart of the city is a special place.  It is here we should find Talia.”  Barrus looked out into the night analyzing the air to hold the shape of a ship.  “I don’t see her ship out there, do any of you?”
Boston took another look out over the water, but didn’t see anything else but water and the flowers. 
By now the people of Grebes had gathered around the innermost ships to see what Barrus and Tus would do.  Tus stepped on the edge of the side of the ship they were on and with a deep loud voice said, “I am Tus, a protector of people I am lead to by the leaves.  In days past I have protected your capitan Talia.  We now come bringing news that could affect all of you here at Grebes, but as well the World.  We must speak to Talia.”  Tus stood still on the edge of the ship confident he would receive an answer someway somehow from the people.  No one spoke out across the waters.  Then Boston saw movement by one of the ships close by.  People walked over to some ropes attached to pulleys and a small boat.  One of the older men in the group stepped into the wood boat while they lowered it slowly into the water.  Once in the water the man started paddling for the middle of the water.  All the people of Grebes watched him as well as Boston and his group.  At first the silence persisted allowing everyone that was on one of the inner ships to hear the soft slow paddles of the older man in the boat.  Then a few people shouted out in protest recognizing what was about to happen.
“Stop the old man.”  
“He won’t just call in Talia, he will alarm the rest of them!”
“Do you all want Grebes to be surrounded by the monsters of the sea?”
“Merlin, what are you doing?  Stop!”
Once people shouted for Merlin to stop what he was doing, others shouted for him to continue.
“Don’t listen to them, you know it’s the right thing to do!”
“Do it Merlin!”
Merlin continued to row until he was at the exact middle of the open water surrounded by ships of people shouting at him.  He didn’t move much from what Boston could tell, but almost without hesitation Merlin raised his arm above his head holding a gun and fired it.  A bright white flare went shooting into the night sky and didn’t stop until high enough to be seen by many far away from Grebes.  After the shot was fired the rest of the people who had gathered around all started to talk and move about at once.  
Tus stepped down from the ships side, “That was easy.  If Talia is close by, she should be here by morning.”
Barrus took a few steps down one of the wooden paths.  “Let’s wait for her at the Huchlot, that’s the ship of Huch and Lottian who are two very good friend of mine.  They are brothers in fact, inherited the ship from their Dad who gave it to both of them.  Their ship is almost always here, we will all be more comfortable sleeping there tonight, plus I need to talk to them.”  
The Huchlot was one of the largest harboring ships in the city making it apparent why a Father would allow two owners of the ship.  It was shaped more like a box then the usual rectangular shape of the other ships.  The sides of Huchlot were also taller than the rest of the ships.  The path they were following came to a stop at one of these sides and instead of leading up and over the six foot high side of the ship the path lead them to one of many doors.  Boston examined the ship taking in it’s beauty.  Along all of it’s sides were many carvings.  Some carvings were of people, pirates, animals, and creatures Boston had never seen before.  Other carvings were there just to make the ship look good.  One carving in particular caught Boston’s eye, it was one of the Light trees just like in Henderson park.  There was a person standing by the branches of the tree holding in his hands ten or twenty branches bunching them together.  The carving wasn’t very large, one of the smaller ones in fact, but Boston felt it held some clue as to what he was supposed to do.
Barrus knocked on the door.  A small window was opened and a voice seeped out, “Yes?”
“It’s Barrus, I wanted to speak to Huch and Lottian and have my friends sleep here tonight.”
“Are you sure you want to come into the Huchlot?”
Barrus looked back at Tus, Boston, and Chelsea, “Yes, we are sure.”
“Then come in.”  
The door cracked open and they stepped through passing the man behind the mysterious voice.  He made no effort to look up at them and stayed seated on a little stool.  He had a dark large cloak wrapped around his body only revealing a small portion of his head and face to them.  Inside the door the ship had an extremely large open floor space.  At the end of one side to their left was a tall structure Boston guessed to by the rooms of the ship including the captain's rooms.  To their right was another tall structure which looked to be for storage and supplies.  In the middle of this courtyard open space was a single large mast though no sail was upon it.  The night was making it hard to see much, which didn’t set quite right with Boston see how this was such a large ship yet in all the open space Boston didn’t see a single person.  There was a slight fog moving about the deck swirling about revealing some barrels and ores but no people.  “Where is everyone Barrus?”
“Good question, this used to be a very happy place.”
They walked to the left toward the tall structure of the ship.  Shining from some of the windows was a dim light.  There looked to be six or seven levels from the deck up to the top of this structure, the ship was shaped like the letter U.  At the base of the structure Barrus called out for Huch.  From one of the dimly lit rooms on the fourth level, the window opened and a light leaned out.  As the light was being shone out the window, Boston noticed behind them some people had appeared and were standing still in the fog just fifteen yards from where them.  Not only had the people appeared out of nowhere, but Tus was gone.  Boston knew by now that when Tus disappeared trouble was bound to happen.  Chelsea saw the people was well and grabbed Boston’s arm.  “Boston, Tus is gone.”
“I know, be ready.”
Barrus seemed oblivious to what was happening and called out again for Huch.  The light dipped back inside the room and the room went dark.  Barrus turned around facing Boston and Chelsea.  “When did all these people show up?”  He didn’t give time for them to respond.  “What is it?  Did you all what to chat?”
One of the people in the group stepped forward and somewhat out of the fog that surrounded them, he was still ten yards away.  “You didn’t have to bring him here Barrus, you know they are following him.  Are safety has been jeopardized.”
“Do what then, hide in a hole?  Hey, is that you Raul?  What are you doing?”  Raul didn’t respond.  “We needed to come here and speak with Talia, you see why when we do.”
“We aren’t waiting Barrus, not this time.  No creatures will be following Boston here tonight, I don’t care if Tus, Red, and Blue are here or not.”  Raul started walking towards Boston, as the fog rolled away from his hand they saw he was holding a gun.  
“Don’t do this my friend, you know it won’t turn out the way your thinking.”
Raul stopped walked now just five yards away.  He slowly raised his arm pointing the gun at Boston.  
Someone yelled out from the group of people.  “Raul, stop this is not what we talked about!”
The moment he had his arm fully extended Boston felt completely helpless.  He thought for sure by now Tus would have stopped this man from getting a shot off, but it seemed the bullet had no restricting barriers to surpass.  It would be a clean shot.  Boston looked at Chelsea who hadn’t moved an inch, she was still standing by his side.  Barrus as well hadn’t moved from them.  Just then, a strange sound came from Raul, a whooshing sound, and the moment Boston heard it he saw the Raul’s arm fall to the ground.  It had been cut clean off.  Raul turned around to see a sword stuck into the floor.  Then directly over the Raul’s head came someone flying through the air holding a rope as a guide.  The man landed in front of Boston’s opposer.  The man was tall and strong, his landing was hard, the rope hardly slowed the fall, but his legs didn’t buckle nor did he show any signs of pain.  He stood on his feet facing Raul in full power and confidence.  Raul took a few steps backward almost stumbling to the ground.
“Huch, I, I, they can’t be here.”
“You are banished from the Huchlot and Grebes.”
“But . . “
“Raul, if I find you in Grebes I will put the rest of your body down.”  
Raul looked around holding his arm trying to stop the blood, in shock.  No one else in the group moved to help him. 
“Lottian!”  Huch called out for his brother so loud Boston was sure the entire city of Grebes must of heard.  “Should we have Red and Blue escort Raul out of town?”
Another person in the group of people Raul had come from spoke, it was Lottian, he was holding a rifle pointed at Raul dressed like the rest of the people with his hood on and a cloth over his gun.  As he spoke he slowly lowered his gun and took off the disguised clothing.  “What a great idea, to the hospital then out of town, and for good Raul.”  Lottian walked up to Raul and leaned in close to his ear whispering, “I was this close Raul, THIS close to pulling the trigger.  Be glad you only lost your arm tonight.”  He then turned to face the rest of the group.  “As for the rest of you, you're no longer welcome at the Huchlot.  Get out!”
The people dispersed so fast it was as if they had been waiting for the word to leave.  Red and Blue appeared along with Tus.  Red and Blue grabbed Raul by one arm and the neck and forcefully escorted him out of Huchlot.
“Remember the hospital on the way out please.  As you know Red and Blue we always reward protectors well for their work.”
Red and Blue nodded then they were out the door.
        
        At Huch and Lottian’s request they had gathered together in “the rooms”.  In this particular room there was enough space for all of them to sit down and talk, then down the hall there were individual room for sleeping.
        “What has been happening around here Huch and Lottian?  This used to be such a wonderful place?”
        “That’s our exact question.  Lottian was undercover with the crew, or at least what’s left of them.  He was trying to figure out why they have been deserting.  What did you find out Lottian, is it what we thought?”
        “Just as we thought.  There wasn’t a soul willing to come to us as captains and tell us to our faces about their fears and desires, they had to do it secretly.  It’s fear Huch, fear of the creatures coming into Grebes.  When Barrus left people started talked.  They figured he was going to get Boston, the one the leaves will follow, and when they returned the creatures would follow.”
        Huch and Lottian both looked at Boston starring without saying a word.  Lottian was like his brother, strong, tall, and tough.  They were good captains and worked very well together.
        “Don’t they know, we already have creatures in Grebes.”  Huch stood up from a chair, he walked about the room in which Boston and everyone else sat comfortably.  He came to a window and looked out over the large deck below.  “Yes, it was a happy place.  Just a few days ago things started changing, though no it seems now like months have passed in our current state.  Word came to Grebes about the one the leaves will follow.  Boston was the name on everyone’s tongue.”
        “How did word get here?  I am from Chesterville, Grebes is a place I have never heard of before, unfortunate but true.  So, how would my name get out here?”  
        “It has been the theory for years, that the leaves would follow someone who lives close to the Light trees.  Many have been watching, scientists, protectors, and other creatures of the forests.  They believed they just had to be close by the trees to observe the person the leaves will follow.  Turns out they were right about the whole proximity thing.  There were probably people who knew about the ing leaves following you well before a few days ago, and the word spread.  When it spread here people got nervous.  They knew your travels to fulfill your mission might bring you here, because of our knowledge about him.”
        Boston looked at Tus and Barrus, “About who, the man that was inside the Great White Light Tree?”
        Huch and Lottian fell motionless and silent.  Lottian tried to say something but couldn’t get the words out, “ . . .what . . . di did you say?” 
        Tus spoke before Boston could, “That’s why we need to speak with Talia.”
        “Who is this person, what does he have to do with this all?”  Chelseas question was exactly what Boston was thinking.
        Huch sat down on the windows ledge while Tus and Barrus stood up and headed for the door.  “It’s getting late, this is a story we both have heard, though one Boston and Chelsea need to hear we will see you all in the morning.”  Barrus nodded signifying ‘what he said’ and followed him out the door.
Huch leaned back against the window, “First of all they have never hear the story from me, usually Lottian is the one telling the story about what happened to our beloved town Atom.  Since I’m telling it Lottian, do you want to hit the hay as well?”
“I’ll say, go on go on.”
“His name is Ludish Viclex.  And we was a native like Lottian and I from the city Atom.  You won’t find the city anymore, doesn’t exist.  Now we are Grebes and the city that cannot be seen, Stratus.  But back in the day Atom was a marvelous place, located on dry land.  We had the best port in the land with great ships, and the wonderful Sky trees, cousins of the Red wood tree only difference is the Sky tree is much taller and a little wider.  The city was great, we had lots of visitor who would come to see our expert architecture.  The homes had beautiful carvings on the sides and most unique designs.  We had business buildings structured as four great pillars with hundreds of floors on top connected the pillars underneath them.  Great vines flowed from the pillars down to the ground flowering all sorts of colors along the way.  Other visitors came to observe the inventive minds of Atom.  New ideas would flow from this area like a mellifluous waterfall.  You would walk down the street beautiful will greenery on both sides of the street and you would see inventors trying out their latest ideas.  Most inventors worked outside because it was so beautiful.  Atom had ten leaders that would govern the people.  There were carefully selected.  Traits such as leadership, integrity, intelligence, wisdom, compassion, vision, charity, and diligence were highly values when it came time for someone to be selected for a position in the ten.  We never voted for a person to join the ten.  The ten themselves would go out in the midst of the people and observe, mingle, and talk to us all, or at least until they found the right person.  All nine have to agree to allow the tenth person in the leadership.   
Occasionally something extra special would occur.  The leaves would come to the city.  We never had Light trees close by, but somehow those leaves would make the travel.  They would glide in the air and travel promptly to the person they set out for, then the person would follow the leaves accompanied by a few protectors.  It was always a fun events for the city and we would cheer on any who set out knowing they have a great adventure and mission ahead of them.  After a few weeks or months the person or persons would come back with the most unusual stories, we loved hearing about them.  Though all the stories were different the people would always say two things similar.  ‘Give the credit to the higher power for we know a higher power than we all is instructing the leaves allowing us to have had this adventure, fulfilling our role in this mission.’  Then they would say something like, ‘You don’t have to travel the World for an adventure, to have a story, or to be successful or happy.  The place where you live holds so much more than some of us might know, and your missions might be right here.’  That was always my favorite part.  So, the years passed along and the leaves would come then go, come then go.  Some people would hope with all their might that the leaves would choose them.  They would think so much about it that when the leaves didn’t choose them they would became so depressed and sad they couldn’t function for days afterwards.  Ludish Viclex was the worse case for this.  When the leaves didn’t come for him he became hateful toward the leaves believing they didn’t think he was of value.  This was dangerous for Atom since Ludish was one of the ten leaders over the city.  He already had influence amongst many citizens, now that he became hateful towards the leaves and the higher power that controlled them, we knew many people would fall into this trap.
Isn’t this a strange idea?  What do leaves know?  They are just doing what they are told.  I believe we all have missions, some involve missions guided by the leaves, some missions involve other things, but we all have one and one mission is not above the other.  Ludish wouldn’t listen to anyone, he wanted the leaves to come to him and have him go on the greatest mission yet to be seen by anyone.  He wanted to come back from following the leaves and tell everyone about his important role.  Again, years passed, he was never visited by the leaves.  Something changed within him.  He went around the city talking to a lot of people sometimes in large groups.  He had a plan, and it was going to involve everyone of us, so he said.  He planned to leave the city and find what controlled the leaves.  Then from there he would send the leaves to every individual in Atom, then the World.  One by one everyone would be guaranteed a mission with the leaves, everyone would have an adventure.  Then he would instruct the protectors to aid the people in their missions making sure they would succeed, not that the protectors would do things for the mission but that they would force the person to succeed.  There would be no option to fail.  He would make sure the mission was a success then after completing the mission the person would be a success and could have a happy pleasing life.  Because this was his plan he would always say to the people, “Then when you get back, come and give me credit for the wonderful adventure and success since I enabled you the chance and success.  He was getting a lot of support, almost half the city was behind him.  
The other half of people were totally against the idea of “taking over control of the leaves”, giving everyone a leaf mission, forcing the success of the missions, and having to come back and give Ludish the credit.  Eventually reason found its mark on most people and they stopped supporting Ludish’s ideas.  Unfortunately this didn’t slow him down at all.  He went around the city trying to convince as many people as he could.  The time came for him to make due on all his promises, so he left the city Atom saying that when the leaves started coming to all, they would know why, then he would return.
Ludish was missing one of the most simple and fundamental rules of the leaves.  He missed it so bad, overlooking it so completely that when he left we knew we would never see him again.  You see the leaves are not under our control, they cannot be controlled at all, at least not by us.  If anyone devises a way to incorrectly influence one of those leaves, the leaf simply won’t work.  It will lay flat on the ground just like any other leaf.  We all thought he would be unsuccessful and probably die trying.  What we didn’t consider in all this was what if he actually found a way to influence all the leaves, what would happen then?  We have begun to see the effects already.”  Huch looked Boston square in the eye, “Haven’t we Boston.  When was the last time you had leaves come to you?”
Boston thought back through the past few days.  “The last time was back a few days, when Chelsea and I were in the mountains near Chesterville.  Since then we haven’t had any contact.”
“If the leaves were left unobstructed, Boston you would have leaves with you now.”
The words of Huch sunk deep inside Boston’s soul.  Huch spoke with such surety and exactness, it gave no room for doubt or skepticism.  Huch must have been able to see his words sinking deep into Boston’s heart and mind because the more he spoke the more Boston could see excitement growing within him.  Excitement that Boston might change the course of their current state of affairs, the course at which they were sailing.  
“Atom was a different place when Ludish left.  The small group of people who supported Ludish was growing slowly and steadily.  Two years after Ludish left his supporters grew to half the people of Atom, and were threatening to continue adding people to their numbers.  Lottian and I along with the other half of sane people in Atom decided we must do something drastic or all might be lost to Ludish’s false philosophy.  Things were getting so bad violence started to break out in small pockets.  A rivalry was developing, things Atom hadn’t seen before in it’s own city.  Captain Talia was one of the ten leaders of Atom.  Ludish was also one of those ten leaders before he left, how he became a leader I don’t know.  But, Talia brought before the eight, Ludish hadn’t been replacced; her idea about a possible solution to the recent division in Atom.  She moved that a grand meeting be called where they could hear both sides of the division, supporters of Ludish and those against.  You would think all nine of the leaders would be against Ludish, but this was not the case.  There were four out of the nine who supported Ludish, that makes exactly half of the leaders if you include Ludish.  Well the meeting was agreed upon and so it was called.  When meeting like this are called people in Atom don’t take it lightly, everyone comes.  We had one of the largest arenas in the land, built just for moments like this.  The entire arena was filled with people.  One side was for Ludish and the other was against.  People were selected to present their sides viewpoint.  When they spoke people would cheer and shout if they agreed, then the other side presented and the against people would shout and cheer.  We had Talia present for us.  She spoke so clearly and true she was able to win back people who had fallen away to support Ludish.  By the time she was done we had two thirds of the people against Ludish and his philosophy.  That left one third of the people who supported Ludish and they were not going to be swayed.  Before we could come to a decision as to what should be done from here the one third started rioting, fighting, and throwing anything in sight.  They were radical believing in Ludish’s ideas so much they were willing to lose everything to make it the common way of thinking so as not to allow anyone the thought of stopping him.  Imagine an arena full of people, almost everyone in the city Atom; fighting for their lives and for what they believed in.  It was the worst battle I have ever seen, and I don’t desire to share more about it.  Let me just say Atom lost thousands of people that day.  The war didn’t stop in the arena, violence spread throughout Atom destroying the city and all the beauty that went with it.  Those one third were unrelenting.  The two thirds people were able to fight them off out of Atom, but we were left without a city.  Everything was destroyed.  We decided to build more ships adding to those we already had in the oceans and live on the ships.  Grebes would be the name, and we would stay there until we could once again establish Atom the way it once was.  The lagoon we established as Grebes is the lagoon we Atom people had always known, Atom is the closest land mass from Grebes.  We made Talia our captain took our ships from the dock to the lagoon close by Atom, and didn’t look back.  We didn’t hear a thing about Ludish’s supporters until Talia sent a group out looking for them.  It had been five years.  The scout group didn’t have to travel far.  We hadn’t went far from Atom in the first place living on these ships.  The group that discovered Ludish’s supported came back and told us they had traveled just upstream from us and established themselves upon the water yet they were in the clouds.  Interesting we both went to water and stayed close to the ruins of Atom.  At first we didn’t understand what the scout group was trying to say.  They explained that they were sailing up a large flat river when they came to thousands of poles stuck in the water.  The wooden poles were so high no one would see the top, though the sky was dark above them.  The group couldn’t figure out what this was, then they heard loud splashes close by as though something had fallen from the sky.  They got into smaller boats to see what it was.  Along the way to the splash of water, more splashes could be heard.  They got to the original area where they heard the first sound and found a body.  Upon further searching they found a total of six bodies.  Some of the bodies were known the the scouting group to be people from the once established Atom.  They had indeed discovered the one third.  We now call the area, the city that can’t be seen, Stratus.  
In Grebes we examined the bodies to see what they cause of death was.  All six people had the JEX virus.  The people of Stratus were throwing their dead off the city into the waters below.  Those waters flowed down the river into the lagoon Grebes was established on.  Like I was saying earlier, we have creature here already.  Many people here have died from JEX.  So here we are, Grebes and Stratus.  This is year eight since the great destruction of Atom, we don’t know what to do.”
“Yes, I remember hearing about the great city Atom.  That they were having some trouble, then I never heard another thing since.  Now I know why.”
“Yeah, well we should all get some sleep, hopefully Talia will be here by morning.”








That morning Boston woke up in his room alone.  Huch had given each of them rooms of their own.  Boston’s room was Lottian’s old room when he was younger.  It still had some of his old things.  Boston got up and went over to looking at some shelves.  The room itself wasn’t large, having just enough room for a small closet, some shelves and the bed.  This room had a window was well as every other room Boston went by.  At the shelves Boston noticed the most peculiar things.  One object was a spyglass.  The long ancient telescope didn’t have an opening to look through on the smaller end.  At the larger end it looked like a regular skyglass with the glass in place giving the illusion that everywhere else in the spyglass was normal and functional except for the end you were supposed to look through.  Another object was a fish put into a glass jar of water.  There were many jars in Lottian’s room, full of water but no fish, they were empty.  The fish was upside down so Boston assumed it was dead. It was a very dark blue color, small about the size of Boston’s fist, and had brilliant yellow eyes.  The fish was shaped more circular than long and didn’t look as though any degeneration had set in.  The longer Boston looked at the fish, the harder it was for him to look away.  The yellow eyes were looking back at him so perfectly Boston became to doubt the fish was dead at all.  Slowly the fish became to turn right side up.  Boston couldn’t take his eyes off the fish.  It turned more and more rotating slowly until it was right side up again.  The fish continued to hold Boston’s attention so much that he was losing track of time, even forgetting to blink though his dried out eyes would remind him.  As Boston continued to stare at the fish he noticed the phone his parents had given him start to slide out his pocket.  The phone wasn’t going out a hole in the bottom of his pocket it was sliding up out the top.  Boston didn’t react at first trying to understand how such a thing was possible.  Then the phone popped out of his pocket falling up toward his face.  Boston catch the phone, but missed the coin that came out along with it.  The coin landed on the ceiling, bouncing just once before laying flat on the ceiling.  Boston reached up to grab the coin and only then notice the ceiling wasn’t painted white like he had seen it before.  It was dark brown like the floor.  The coin had landed on the floor not the ceiling.  The moment Boston realized what was happening, he came crashing down to the floor like the coin that fell from his pocket.  The fish happened rotated right side up, he was the one who had rotated, and in mid air.
“Good to see you met my fish.”  Lottian had come around the corner probably responding to the sound of Boston’s body hitting the ground.
“What kind of fish can make you float upside down?”
“You’re lucky you noticed what was happening, try figuring out your upside down in the ocean.  Not so easy.  This is a creature of the ocean.  It has killed many people, enchanting them by its color and yellow eyes, then positioning them just right so it can transport into your body.  See all these other jars?  One day the fish will be in the jar by the window, the next day it will be in a jar on the shelf.  It can transport from place to place if it can calculate the right place to transport.  From this room to the lagoon would be much too far for the old fish, but it can go from place to place in this room.  These fish cannot transport into another body while out of the ocean, to difficult, but it always tries positioning people just to see if it can pull it off.”
“That’s a crazy pet.”
“I’m a little crazy myself, so we are a good fit.  I keep him as a reminder of what is out there in the waters.  I caught this fish when I was nineteen.  Swimming with my Dad.  It had him enchanted and was positioning him to attempt a transport into his body and start eating.  I noticed by Dad wasn’t on the surface of the water anymore so I swam down and saw the creature positioning him.  Without thinking, I swam over to them and cupped the fish in my hands, the fish couldn’t see so it wasn’t able to escape.  Strange the fish didn’t bite me once.”
“Everyone up, everyone up.  She is here.  Talia and her ship have arrived.”  Tus’s voice had excitement in it, he must have been waiting all morning for word she had come.
Boston and Lottian left the room and followed Tus out the rooms.  Chelsea, Huch, and Barrus soon followed.  Before leaving the boat through passing the same man who still sat on his stool, they all looked at each other for a moment with slight smiles on each of their faces.  They were thinking of the past events they had been through together, and somehow this moment was a mental preparer since no one knew what Talia would say when she learned they had found Ludish Licvex, and of all places Boston found him in the Great White Tree.
The speed at which they walked invalidated the notion they were walking at all.  Crossing wooden bridges between ships, and down the length of boats so fast it would have been impossible to trace their exact route back.  All Boston knew was Talia had arrived.  She hadn’t come by plan, she had been summoned by them and the faithful older man who knew as well as them that news of Ludish needed to be brought before her.  
Boston saw Chelsea’s reaction to seeing Talia’s ship before he came around the last boat blocking his view.  Chelsea was stopped in her path.  She starred in the direction of Talia’s boat as though this was the first moment she had seen the invention.  The stare wasn’t in a stupor, more of a respectful look given when something beautiful has taken place.  Boston finally positioned himself behind Chelsea and saw the magnificent boat.  It was catching the rising sun making it difficult to see every detail at once.  It had to be taken in piece by piece.  The wood of the ship was so similar to Barrus’s boat and Boston knew is was the workmanship of the people of Quen.  The wood’s grain ran so perfectly together the wood looked like dark brown steel.  Inside Boston was sure you could see the outside world just like Barrus’s ship.  The ship was quite large, not as large as the Huchlot, but large enough to be intimidating to any challengers and small enough to travel the ocean waters with great speeds.  Then Boston saw Talia.  She was on the deck looking directly at them, and she was not alone, her entire crew was filing out from below the ship.  One by one they came up and stood by Talia.  They lined the entire edge of the ship.  Unlike last venture to the most inner part of the city of ships, there were no people from Grebes on any of the other ships.  It was just Tus, Barrus, Boston, Chelsea, Huch, and Lottian looking at the impressive crew and ship of Talia the captain of Grebes.  In the silence of the morning Talia looked around the innermost ships seeing only Boston and those with him.  
“Who summoned us here!”  Her voice echoed off the water rolled to all the ships for any near to hear.  “I demand to know this moment!  Who?”
Tus started to move forward from the group.  Boston heart was racing, Talia’s tone of voice didn’t sound to Boston like anything inviting and soft.  He knew it was his message that brought them here and he needed to deliver it.  Boston grabbed Tus’s arm, “It’s okay Tus.  This looks like a great time for me to introduce myself.”  Boston walked past Tus and took a step up on the side of the ship elevating himself for Talia to see.  He cleared his throat to speak.
“Boston.”
She recognized him before he could say a word.
“You came sooner than expected.”  She slammed her foot on the deck two times, and the ship started moving toward them.  It pulled in close, close enough that one of Talia’s crew members threw over a plank of wood connected both their ships.  “Come on them.  Come aboard the Suttali.”  
Tus took no time waiting around.  He moved from the back of the group to the front walking with pride, confidence, and a happiness Boston hadn’t seen in him since the first day he met Tus.  When Tus reached the plank of wood Talia broke into a scream and ran toward Tus.  She jumped into the air and landed into Tus’s arms.  Tus wrapped his arms around Talia and they kissed.  
Huch leaned over to Boston and Chelsea, “Guess we forgot to mention that part.  Talia is Tus’s wife.”
Boston, and Chelsea walked along the wooden bridge between ships to meet Talia and her crew.  Boston didn’t want to wait until he was all the way across the plank of wood to start talking to Talia, he was happy Tus was married, especially to Talia who he had heard such wonderful things about.  “Talia, so good to meet. . .”  Boston’s was stopped mid sentence by Red and Blue.  They had both appeared out of the thin air and were now standing between him and Talia’s ship.  Boston had to stop so suddenly that Chelsea who had been walking behind him bumped into Boston’s back.  Red and Blue stood there similar to Talia’s crew who were all still standing tall and motionless staring at Boston and Chelsea.  The only difference between Red, Blue, and Talia’s crew was that Red and Blue were shaking their heads from side to side communicating not to go any further.  Their faces were stern and sober.  Boston suddenly got a sinking feeling, things felt heavier like gravity had been turned up and he knew something was wrong. 
“I knew something was wrong.”  Talia’s voice seemed to inflict self condemnation for not acting on a gut feeling.  She grabbed Tus by the hand and waved for Boston and Chelsea to follow.  She walked in a furry toward some steps on the back side of the ship.  They ascended the steps and entered a large room through wooden double doors, it was the captain's room.  Once everyone was inside she left the room and shouted so loud it was easily heard inside the room, “I don’t want any of my crew moving an inch, we have an imposter!  Stay are you are.  Red and Blue keep an eye on these men and see if you can’t locate this imposter.  If any crewman moves they must not be my crew so dispose of them.”
Boston heard Talia direct Red and Blue, but what about Huch, Lottian, and Barrus?  Boston rushed outside to see if he could see them before Talia came back inside.  He surveyed the deck and the ship they left to get to Talia’s ship; there was no sign of Huch, Lottian, or Barrus.  Where are they?  Boston thought to himself, then he remembered something Barrus had said before finding Huch and Lottian, he said he had to talk to them about something, what was it?
Talia turned to returned to her room to join the others, “Boston please go back inside.  We don’t know what this threat is yet.”  They walked back together.
  “I knew it, I knew it!  I didn’t feel right sailing back here.  I had a feeling there was something on my ship that wasn’t supposed to be here, but I kept coming hoping I was wrong.  Red and Blue sensed it just like I did.  Didn’t you feel it too Tus?”
“I was hard to distinguish but yes I did as well.”
“Right, well none of those men will move unless they are not one of my crew members.”  Talia took a deep breath and collected herself.  “Sorry about that Boston, and . .”
“My name is Chelsea.  I had been with Boston since we set out on this journey.”
“Good to meet you both.  I’m Talia, Tus’s wife.  And no I’m not a protector like him, but I can take this old man.”  She laughed and stared into Tus’s eyes for a while.  It was obvious they hadn’t seen each other in a while. 
“She has always thought that, though completely untrue.”  Tus went over and sat by Talia on the corner of her desk.  Talia was similar to the woman Boston has pictured.  She had long black hair, green eyes, and was about the height of Chelsea.  
“It is good to be here, the more people we meet the more I know there is good left in the World.  Thanks for coming to help us.”
“Of course Chelsea.  Now while Red and Blue do some investigation, what is it you needed to tell me?”
“Go ahead Boston tell her what you saw.”
“Right.  Well Chelsea and I were taken into the Great White Light Tree just before a herd of creatures were upon us.  While we were sitting on one of the platforms inside, I looked above us at an upper platform.  From the edge of the platform I saw someones head peek over the edge looking at us.  The moment he saw me looking back up at him the head was pulled back out of vision.  It was after that moment that the tree put us outside again.”
Talia was speechless.  She looked over at Tus who nodded his head, yes. 
“It can’t be.”
“Talia, I don’t know how, but Ludish is in the Great White Light Tree.  It’s him.  And every moment he is inside that tree the leaves work less and less.  Boston hasn’t seen a leaf for days now.  This is probably why you have an imposter on the ship.  We have been running into creature after creature on this journey.  I suspect they are all sent by Ludish.”  
“Did anyone see where Huch, Lottian, and Barrus went off to?”  Boston looked around the room at confused faces.  “I can’t see them anywhere, they're gone.”
Tus and Talia rushed outside.  They ran down the steps and started searching.  Tus climbed up the mask to get a higher look.  “I can still see Barrus’ boat.”
Boston kept thinking about what Barrus had said, how we wanted to speak with Huch and Lottian about something.  He called out to Chelsea before she left him alone in the room, “Chelsea, hang on a second.  I wanted to ask about Barrus.  Do you remember hearing him say he needed to talk with Huch and Lottian about something?”
“Yes, but I thought he spoke with them at the Huchlot.”
“Right, I wonder what they talked about.”
“Do you think they betraying us or something like that?”
Boston considered the question for a minute thinking of the likelihood of them actually being on the wrong side, “No, I don’t think so.  I think they are on our side.  Still, what was it they discussed?”
“Boston, Chelsea come out here.”  Tus was calling them.  They went outside to see Tus had climbed down the mast and was walking amongst the crew members who were holding true to Talia’s command.  “We need you two to be in sight for the next little while.”
On the opposite side of the boat Talia was searching her crew inspecting them seeing if anything seems out of place.  “Red and Blue, have you found anything yet?” 
“No not yet.”
She then yelled over to Tus, “We need to find this imposter.  There are questions we need answered about Ludish.”
Tus started inspecting the crew as well.  They had been standing still this entire time, not moving nor talking.  They looked straight ahead with no expressions on their faces.  Boston and Chelsea decided to help.  Boston didn’t look at each sailor in order down the line at which they stood along the edge of the ship, instead he walked past a few then when he felt a sailor seemed different he stopped and walked around to look into their face.  The sailors never looked Boston back in the eye.  Boston walked past a few more men looking for any clue.  As Boston passed one man he notice part of his shirt wasn’t tucked in.  It was just a corner of the shirt, but the rest of the shirt had the appearance it was put on in a hurry not being tucking in carefully or even very straight.  Boston’s eye looked on to the next sailors.  The shirt looked alike, put on in a hurry.  Boston moved from the backs of the sailors to the front to see their face.  Both men had a thick beard and the brim of their hat hung low over their forehead.  Boston leaned in for a closer look when one of the men’s eyes shifted looking Boston square in the eye, then the man winked.  The wink revealed exactly who the man was, Huch.  The man next to him, Lottian.  
        “What are you two doing?”
        “No time to explain.”  Huch then broke formation along with Lottian and together they ran toward the middle of the ship.  Red and Blue were on the move the instance they saw movement.  Huch and Lottian didn’t stop at the middle of the ship, but continued to the other side.  Showing no sign of slowing down they reached the edge of the ship where they grabbed one of the sailors and rammed him along with themselves off the ship.  Red and Blue got to the edge a moment too late but watched as Huch, Lottian, and the other sailor fell down toward the water.  By the time Boston got to the ships edge he could see Barrus’ boat zipping across the water at top speed.  The boat was even faster than Boston had thought possible.  As the three men toppled into the water, Barrus went cruising by scooping them up in a fishing net.  The net flung the men on board as quickly as it had gathered them.  Then Barrus turned the boat directing it straight out of Grebes.  As everyone on Talia’s ship watched in shock, Barrus shouted back at them one sentence squeezing the sound through his big smile, “Stratus will treat him much better.”


































































        The mood of Grebes was changing as word spread about what Barrus, Huch, and Lottian had done.  It was hard to describe, a nervous disappointment was the best way Boston knew how to explain it to himself.  Chelsea and Boston talked about the many reasons why they would do such a thing.  Why did they steal the intruder?  Had they been blind to their undercovered plan this entire time, or was something else happening they didn’t understand just yet?  The questions went on and the more Chelsea and Boston talked about it the more they came to the conclusion that those men were good.  There was no way they would turn their backs on Grebes, and all the good people there.  They must have a plan with the imposter and the plan includes Stratus.
        Boston and Chelsea had gone to the highest point in the city they could find.  There they sat and talked about the many things that have happened.  From where they were they would see much on the city.  The ship they were on was very tall and even had a place for people to sit on the back side of the ship which was build so high up they were almost even with the top of the mast.  How functional the ship was, they were unsure, but it was a great lookout over Grebes.  The sun was getting close to setting and they looked over the calm waters.  It was amazing how more much light the water held then the objects around them.  All around shadows were growing darker yet the water was glowing with light.  They sky help patches of blue showing themselves through the orange and yellow clouds.  From the looks of the dark clouds above rain was coming and quick.  Boston hoped it would cause the people of Grebes to calm down.  They were moving so frantically below anyone who wasn’t nervous caught the scare was they saw their friends and family run about from ship to ship, but where were they going, what were they doing?  Hundreds of people all moving about.  Many people were moving frantically, but they were moving so slow at the same time.  Boston thought these were the people most disappointed of all, almost giving up all hope of things turning out well.  Now that their great sailor with the White Hawk was gone who would remain loyal?  Other people walked with sick, no doubt having the JEX disease.  As they scuffled about people would clear a path for them to pass.  The family who helped the ill were weighed down with so much unfulfilled hope of ever finding a cure it was beginning to show on their faces.  The disease was spreading so quickly throughout most of World it was almost seen as commonplace.  Boston felt an ache growing inside him.  He wanted to help all these people.  He wanted to help the nervous runners, the slow disappointed walkers, the sick, and the helping hands.  
        The water was losing it’s lite surface and began to darken like the rest of it’s surrounding.  The dark clouds released their rain.  As the moisture fell upon Grebes Boston felt a small relief.  At least now the people would stop moving about from ship to ship.  Now they would realize that they have nowhere to go, its here that they must stand, its here they much overcome fear and the nerves.  If they left Grebes it would only be putting off a worse future.  If they didn’t do anything to stop Ludish or his followers what would happen but bad.  Boston was realizing all the good the leaves did for people.  Whatever these missions were that people were guided to do by the leaves really did a lot for the individual and the community in which they lived.  Without the leaves guidance many people would be stationary.  Potentially moving from place to place doing a thing here or there, but ultimately moving without anchor in their life.  Boston was beginning to see the leaves weren’t just guided missions for people, they were a blanket of protection and a sense of security.  It was a peaceful feeling that they were being watched over by a higher power, by God.  With Ludish and his creatures out to thwart all those good things and succeeding, why not be scared, why not be nervous?  He somehow made it into the Great White Light Tree.  He was stopping the leaves.  He had thousands of creatures out to stop those against him and his plans.  But what was he out to destroy?  Would a forced mission for everyone be so bad?  By his selection and direction everyone would be guaranteed a guided mission from the leaves, what would be lost.  And since he was doing the work give him the credit.  The whole idea never resonated well with Boston.  How can Ludish guide the leaves anyway when they have been guided all these years by a higher power?  As if he knew better than the higher power.  Boston remembered what Huch had said, “I believe we all have missions, some involve missions guided by the leaves, some missions involve other things, but we all have one and one mission is not above the other.”
Boston knew Ludish’s plan was wrong.  Everyone already has a mission of which they should be able to choose and do, not be forced into some guided mission by the leaves, and certainly Ludish shouldn’t be given credit for a system he didn’t create, a system he was not to try and run in the first place.  Yet he opposed the leaves and believed he knew better.  He thought to get praise for forcing success and not allowing people to fulfill their true missions.  That would not be success, that would be an easy road without challenge or learning.  In all this effort to control the leaves how was Ludish missing the fact the leaves would not work for anyone who tries and influence them to do contrary to their purpose?  The leaves were not moving, they were not guiding.  He was shutting them down altogether.  Boston thought to himself, was Ludish really succeeding?  Boston had the feeling Ludish’s plan was spotted long before he set out to accomplish it.  He had a feeling the leaves had something up their sleeves or perhaps in other words they were louring Ludish in for the crushing blow.
        Boston again looked at the people below.  They hadn’t slowed down at all.  The rain hadn’t deterred them, it had lubricated their chaos.  
        “Chelsea, why do you think these people are so scared?”
        “I think they are afraid the leaves are going to be gone forever.  It seems a little silly to me that some man can outsmart a higher power than us all.  Don’t you?”
        “Yeah I think so too.”
        “And you know, I think you have an important part in all this.  I’m not sure what it is, but you have to play some part else why would the leaves follow you?”
        As Boston began to answer he saw a flare fire into the night sky.  The rain didn’t touch the scorching flare as it illuminated the night with a dark purple.  The flare was just as intense as the white one the older man set off to call for Talia, except this flare’s color was absorbed and reflected by every water droplet in the sky.  It made the color seem like it had encompassed them all at once.  Boston looked down at the former flow of people.  They all had stopped.  And now it wasn’t just the frantic people who were outside, thousands more had come out of their houses in the many ships to see what the color was.  It was that sight that caused Boston to stand up.  He hadn’t thought about the people who were inside, not nervously running around, not hopeless.  These were the people who had hope in their faces, they knew Ludish would be overcome.  They were fighting, faithful people, not giving up.  It wasn’t just the health who had come out, many infected with JEX were outside now as well.  It was obvious they hadn’t lost hope, neither had their families.  Boston would see parents without children outside.  He knew instantly they were missing children to Price Science, but he didn’t know what the connection was between them and Grebes.  The parents were old to young meaning their children were as well, young and some had to be older in the range of high twenties to thirty.
        Chelsea stood up as well and with Boston they followed the people to the center of the city where he knew they would find Talia’s ship.
        As they walked with the people of Grebes Boston pondered what Talia would say to the people, what the plan was going to be.
        “Chelsea, do you think we will go over Barrus, Huch, and Lottian?”
        “I’m not sure, but that may be our best option.”
        When they neared the edge of the ships it was apparent that every member of Grebes was at this meeting.  The rain had subsided and they all stood wet and eager to hear from their leader Talia.  The people lined the ships edge getting as close as possible to Talia’s ship which was anchored in the middle of the open water, center of Grebes.  Talia’s crew had gone under the deck leaving the ship looking barren, no one was outside.  Boston wasn’t able to see much past all the people who had crowded in and close the the ship’s edge.  
        “Hey Chelsea, lets get up higher so we can see what’s going on.”
        “Good idea.  There’s a spot at the end of this ship that raises up above the crowd.”
        Boston and Chelsea made their way over thinking they would need to squeeze through the people there being so many.  Though as more and more people noticed Boston walking through them they quickly moved aside.  The collective movement was like a ripple in the water moving from one person to the next.  There appeared in front of Boston and Chelsea a clear path devoid of people.  Many of those people moved because they didn’t want Boston anywhere close to them for fear of what follows him.  But many others moved out of the way in respect to what they believed Boston would do.  The opinions were varied as far as what he would actually do, but they were all good things, and the people who believed Boston could do those things were showing their respect.  Boston and Chelsea walked slowly through the people looking at the people as they walked.  Boston could tell who had moved out of fear because they wouldn’t look him in the eye.  
        Once they had reached the spot Chelsea pointed out, they sat down and readied themselves for Talia’s message, and just in time as they saw the door open to the room she had counseled with them in just yesterday.  Out the door walked Talia and Tus.  You could see on their faces they had a clear plan and were confident it would work.  Talia walked to the boat’s edge.  
        “People of Grebes, as you know Barrus, Huch, and Lottian have taken one of the creatures who looks like a man.  They are taking the creature to Stratus.”
        The people immediately started to whisper and look amongst themselves as if they had heard the news for the first time, though they all knew what had happened hours before this moment.. Talia waited for them to quiet down again.  The ships surrounding Talia served as a great barrier for her voice to echo making it easy for everyone to hear.  She started again.
        “Stratus has been our enemy for some time now and we do not know what they will do with the creature let alone Huch and Lottian.  Thus we are a people have a decision to make.  We either wait for other creatures to come then capture and question it for information about Ludish, that is if the creature can even talk, or we go after the creature with Huch and Lottian.  The creature was on my ship for days without my knowledge, it can talk else we would have discovered it sooner.  The decision needed to be made between us as a people, but I feel strongly that we should go after the creature, go after Huch and Lottian and see if they have joined Stratus or are still on our side.  We need answers and I do not want to wait!  It’s time we go to Stratus!  It’s time we stop Ludish!”  
        Talia stood waiting a response from the people.  After a very short pause people started to cry out across the water yelling their thoughts.
        “Go get those traders!”
        “A visit to Stratus is suicide, it’s crazy.”
        “Stratus!”
        “No, no!”
        The thoughts were definitely ununified.  Talia looked patiently on at the people trying to hear what they had to say.  Boston thought to himself, why was she asking everyone anyway?  She is the captain, what she says goes.  Then it occurred to Boston what she was really asking of them.  Stratus was the “enemy” they would not be receptive, and who knows what a visit could start between them.  She was asking the people to consider preparing for war.
        A mist all the yelling and struggle to get to the edge of the ships to voice their opinion, Boston could see the people clearing a path just a few ships down from where he and Chelsea sat.  Down the path walked an old man.  He seemed to be the same older man who previously was lowered into the water in a boat to row out into the middle of the flowered water to shoot off the summoning signal for Talia’s return.  The old man came to the ships edge.  It was apparent he had earned the people’s respect, for when the others saw him poised to speak they quieted down to listen.
        “Talia, why is it you feel so strongly to go after this man creature?  Is there more purpose than you have yet told?”
        Talia’s stance changed and it could be observed there was more information.  Talia didn’t wait long to speak.
        “We were once unified.  Atom was our name and our hope.  When the now Stratus rebelled and started the great destruction of not only our homes and city, but our friendship and vision; their success was greatly due not to Ludish’s wise mind nor those that followed him.  The success flowed from the cities street cleaning crew.  Why?  Because the street cleaning crew knew all the paths, holes, and avenues that could be leveraged as an advantage to help them get optimum position.  Ludish’s followers knew the importance of this knowledge and forced the street cleaners to give up their maps of the city.  Yes, most of the loses were had in the arena, but outside those that followed Ludish were gaining ground on us.  That knowledge of unknown avenues to hide and attack gave them great favor.  Ultimately we ran them out thanks to the sheer number of people eventually arriving to help, but I have never forgotten the power of the few knowledgeable fighters who initially fought off many of our people.”
        Talia looked around at the many listeners in Grebes.  Everyone knew her next sentence would be the message she had been holding back.
        “That creature now likely at Stratus, took something from us.  He took the revelatory box.”
        The people broke out into a commotion.  They staked many questions not addressed to anyone.  There was small movement of quick steps back and forth, not wanting to be here hearing this but not daring to leave in fear they would miss something important.
        Boston and Chelsea looked at each other in similar confusion as the people below.  
        “What is the revelatory box?”
        “I don’t know, I’ll ask someone.”
        Boston went to the nearest person just below where he and Chelsea had been sitting.  The person was just as frantic as the other people.  
        “Excuse me, what’s the revelatory box?”
        The person didn’t answer and just walked by in a hurried pace.  Boston looked around and found a young man maybe sixteen years old.
        “Excuse me, do you know what the revelatory box is?”
        The young man responded, “Of course, boy are we sunk.  That box has every ship’s map showing the inside and outside.  They have all our hiding places and know all our weaknesses, since every ship that joins our ranks is required to give Talia a map of their ship.  The idea was to make sure we knew all possible avenues, like the street cleaners of Atom.  Yep, we’re done.”
        Boston climbed back up to where Chelsea was and told her about the revelatory box.  They now knew why the choice to get to Stratus was unavoidable.  With understanding of every ship in Grebes, Stratus could destroy them shooting the ships in the weak spots and shooting where people would hide.  Boston looked over at Talia, she looked terrible.  It was obvious she was feeling horrible and completely stressed, yet she stood tall and confident as though she had more to tell.
        “People of Grebes, we are going to Stratus.  And I have invited a special guest to come along, Tommy Bocrow.”
        The announcement of Tommy Bocrow silenced the people almost instantly.  A man walked out from Talia’s ship surely the man just announced.  He was tall, and in good shape.  He walked unlike most people walking to some internal beat of music.  From first site Boston could tell this man had every ounce of confidence a person would have, yet there was something missing.  Boston felt that the man was faking the confidence.  It was hard to tell, he acted so confident in his mannerism, but confident in what?  His clothes were loose and colorful.  Yellow streaked up his pants rolling into blues and reds.  He had many necklaces on full of colors and variety.  
Tommy walked to the front of the ship walking in front of Talia turning completely around twice so the people got a full view of who he was.  Then without saying a word pulled out a gun and pointed it into the air.  He fired, his body still swaying to the beat of internal music.  The bullet rocketed up into the clouds above, out of sight.  Everyone was silent.  A faint sound was heard above, a sound of metal colliding with metal.  Tommy nodded confidently, reached into a pocket and pulled out a folded up net.  He unfolded it and threw it into out into the water.  With all eyes on the net the people watched.  From the clouds a quiet sound grew louder.  At this point Tommy started dancing openly laughing aloud.  The noise from the clouds finally came to everyone’s view.  It was a dark grey metal object and it was falling quickly downward toward Talia’s ship.  Tommy continued to dance on, not even looking up at the falling object.  As it came closer and closer a wind started to pick up running across the waters of Grebes and through the air above.  As the wind made contact with the metal object it was pushed just slightly off it’s course which was now close enough to be identified was a missile.  It’s trajectory was unreal, it fell so fast through the air a person could hardly follow it fall.  Then splash it landed into the water diving deep and hard into the dark depths between Talia’s ship and the ships of Grebes surrounding Talia’s ship.  Tommy stopped dancing then after what looked like a moment of focusing himself he dove into the water.  His body clothes disappeared beneath the water. After a short time he surfaced with the net in hand.  The net had something inside, Boston couldn’t believe it, Tommy had the missile in the net.  He was helped back aboard Talia’s ship by Tus.  He held up the net then pulled it off it’s captured prize showing the complete missile.  Tommy rotated the missile around and pulled something off the side from what looked like a control panel of some sort.  He held it up, it was the bullet he shot into the sky, the same bullet.  While still holding the bullet Tommy said aloud, “Lucky shot.”
The ships of Grebes erupted in cheers at applause.  The mood had been instantly changed, now an energy pulsed in the atmosphere.  The energy was not of fear as formally before, but of excitement and joy.  Boston was just as confused as Chelsea as to what was happening so they decided to get aboard Talia’s ship and talk with Tus, Blue, and Red.  While they were climbing down the tall point of the ship a chant was starting to develop coming from the people.  
        “Tommy.  Stratus.  Tommy.  Stratus!”
        The people wanted Tommy apart of the group who ventured out to Stratus.  
        Then came the hero’s acceptance speech for the call to go to Stratus, “Stratus!”  Tommy’s cry was made with one arm proudly extended into the air fist clenched and all. 
























        Talia’s ship set sail that night.  Aboard the ship, Talia, Tus, Red, Blue, Boston, Chelsea, and of course Tommy Bocrow.  As they passed the many ships of Grebes along the watery path leading to the outside world, people lined up along the ships edges that gave border to this the only path into the center of Grebes and consequently the only path out.  They had solemn faces and each hand held something.  It was at this moment that Boston remembered part of the experience in the Great White tree.  As the fox walked along with the porcupine he had in his hand purple flowers.  At the time Boston didn’t understand why, but now as he watched the people of Grebes he could see they all held purple flowers in their hands.  As Talia’s ship passed by, each person tossed the purple flowers into the water.  Down they would fall, until resting atop the water’s surface.  
        “Purple fire.”  Blue had spoken so softly that though Boston didn’t realize he was behind him, his sudden comment hadn’t startle Boston at all.  “It’s always been a tradition here, that when someone leaves with the possibility of never coming back, the purple fire flower is thrown into the water as the ship passes.  The flower not only floats on the water for months, but deposits chemicals on the ship and disperses its purple color into the water that slowly dissipates until it’s reactivated.  The chemicals adhere to the ship forming strong bonds, then as the ship tries to return home those same chemicals reactivate the purple from the flower revealing the path back home.  Really an amazing thing, though unless if the crew and ship need help before the return home.  But I believe the flowers float for months for a reason.  Everyday as the people go these waters they will see the purple fire flower and remember we are still out there somewhere.  They remember us, they pray for us.  That is what really helps us get home.”
        As Boston listened to Blue speak he wasn’t able to connect why the fox was holding this same flower, but for now he felt they were going the right way and that gave him comfort.  
        The ship came out of Grebes into the open waters of the lagoon.  Their course was set to go upstream to Stratus, the city that cannot be seen.  With the night closing in Chelsea had gone off to bed, as well as some of the others, but Boston noticed Tommy sitting outside looking toward Stratus.  This was his opportunity to talk to him, and find out who Tommy Bocrow was, and why the people had cheered so loudly.  
        Boston walked slowly over to where Tommy sat.  There were many chairs around him, but he had chosen a barrel to sit upon.  The barrel was shorter than most of the others, but Boston didn’t pay much attention to that.  Without turning his head around to see who was approaching Tommy called out to Boston.
        “Have a seat my boy, do have a seat, there are so many around, chose one and have a seat, do have a seat.”
        Boston pulled a chair up to Tommy’s side and sat down.  There was something on the chair, he had sat on it.  Boston pulled out from underneath him a folded paper, inside it read, “Boston have a seat.”
        “A lucky guess my boy.”
        “Yes, good guess.  How did you know I . . . well, nevermind.  Tommy how do you know Talia, and Tus?”
        “Lucky I guess.  They are very good people.  Wouldn’t you agree?”
        “Absolutely.  They have helped me so much.”
        “Indeed they have.  I hope I can be of some help along your way.”  Tommy finally turned his head to look at Boston.  His face and eyes held an inviting glow.  There was warmth about him communicating a sincerity Boston hadn’t thought he would find.  Boston relaxed, and sat back into his chair.  “I can do many things people find extremely lucky.  In fact that has been my fame, the luckiest man in the world, can you believe it?  This title has followed me for years.”
        “What happened today was impressive.  How did you know about that missile, I still don’t know what that was all about.”
        “Stratus always sends a warning missile before they try and attack, why they do nobody knows, but they do.  The missile is never armed, just lands in the water and disintegrates.  I knew the missile was coming at that exact time.  Boston you are doing great things.  I am here for a specific purpose.  Of all people on this ship, you need to know what that is, and how I am going to do it.
        A crocodiles head rotates round and round.  Smiling proud the crocodile frowns.  The rats and mice have looked on in pause because they have never found a way into the crocodiles jaws.  What does the croc think is so special to hide?  Just ask the mice, they have found a way inside. They have found a way inside, oh yes, they have found a way inside, a way inside, yes yes a way inside, they have found a way inside those jaws.”  
        Boston sat waiting for the rest of the story but Tommy looked on at Boston smiling not saying a word.  
        “How did the mice find a . .”
        Mid sentence Tommy flung a small piece of food into Boston’s mouth.  It tasted disgusting.  Boston quickly spit it out and over the ship’s side.  
        “What was that!”
        “That was a moldy piece of cheese.  Hey Red, I got it in his mouth!”  
        Red’s head popped out a window on the other side of the ship, he had been sleeping.  “Good for you, get to bed.”
        “Sorry Boston, Red challenged me that I couldn’t get you to taste that old moldy piece of cheese.  He didn’t set any rules of course so I had to be creative.”
        “That was disgusting.”
        “Do you see now Boston why I am here?”
        “I hope that wasn’t the reason just there.”
        They both laughed hard.  Tommy, Boston was discovering, was fun to be around, full of energy and unusual stories.  Though in the back of Boston’s mind were the words Tommy had spoken just moments before, “I knew the missile was coming. . .”  Those words established a fense in Boston’s mind of which trust was struggling to climb.
        “No, no, I have methods to get extraordinary things done.  Once I flew out to a small island, perhaps you have heard of it, Rinbop?  No?  Ok, well you should go visit one of these days.  Anyway, there are very few people of the island.  I invited a few of my friend out to visit me.  Then one of the nights I was staying I snuck out of my room and went down to the beach.  There I dug a hole so deep I had to use the sides to climb back out.  At the bottom I put over ten thousand dollars worth of gold coins.  Now Boston, this island is very poor, the people are extremely nice, but poor and ten thousand dollars would change their lives drastically.  The next day I told everyone in sight to follow me down to the beach, we were going treasure hunting and I was feeling lucky.  So they all followed remembering that I Tommy am the luckiest man in the world, if there was any treasure to find it would be found with me.  Down we went people grabbing shovels along the way.  I found my spot where I had dung just the night before and told everyone to start digging around that area.  I could see the people were doubtful, but they started digging anyway.  I told them to come get me if they found a prize.  So there I sat in my room just waiting for the big discovery.  Now you might think this entire setup was obvious and the people would know I had put the money there previously, but you know what, I do this thing all the time and people have come to expect this sort of thing from me wherever I go so do you think anyone asked questions about it?  No, they didn’t.  It took about one hour then they all came running gold in hand.  It was a pretty site I tell you.  It felt good to give something to them, something that would be useful.”
Tommy leaned in closer to Boston, “And you know the best part?  They all thought I had randomly chosen the area, that truly I was lucky.”
During Tommy’s story Boston could feel the distrust growing.  How could someone be this way.  What motivates a person to set themselves up to be something they are not?  Boston’s thoughts were racing as he tried to pick just a few so he could respond to this unreal story. 
“So you’re a complete fake, sorry to put it that way but I had to say it.  You're an imposter and unworthy of the so called title, “Luckiest man in the world.”
“Those are bold words Boston.”
“Do you not see that what you did was wrong?  Most people see you as something you are not, something you have tricked them into thinking.  Like I said, sorry for using such strong language but this is not right.”
“Did you not hear that I gave those people ten thousand dollars?  You know Boston I don’t tell most people that story.  I thought you would think it was funny, an inside take on things.  What does it all matter anyway, what they don’t know won’t do harm, plus I know many people who are doing this sort of thing all the time and they get along just fine.  Besides no one knows a thing.
At this point Boston stood up and for some reason he thought of what Xavier would say.  Words sprang out his mouth as though they themselves were alive, and from the moment the words left Boston’s lips he knew they were true.  “Tommy, God know’s.  He would want you to be you, not some unreal person.  I’m sure the real you is just fine, in fact great.”
Tommy sat in silence for a moment letting Boston's words sink in.  “You know Boston, you almost persuaded me to change just there.”
Tommy stood up and started to walk away toward one of the ships rooms.  “I’m here Boston to use my “Luckiness” to get you in good standing with Stratus, to get you on the people’s side.  You saw the reaction I got in Grebes.  I would be careful not to change my mind to help you.”
He turned to go to his room, but Boston had to ask one last question, “Tommy how did you know the missile was coming at that specific time?”
Tommy turned his head to look over his shoulder, he didn’t say a word and continued walking to his room.
Boston stayed outside by the ship’s side pondering everything that has happened over that past few weeks.  He had met some very interesting people, though of the many new faces the one he was most happy to get to know better was that of Chelsea.  She had become a strong support for him and someone he could count on.  It was like a thought he always felt to be true now materializing to experiences he could now give as examples, though still just as true as before.  From the time he and Chelsea went walking through town and mountain Holdem he felt she would be a great support and love in his life, but now he had seen these thoughts play out.  Boston’s thought turned to his friends in Chesterville.  He felt bad so many families were incomplete, they had members missing.  Where had they all gone?  Will they return, and in what state?  He thought about his own family and hoped they were doing well.  Then he remembered the phone his Dad had given him.  He had not called to communicate for days now.  He took out the phone and called home.  The phone only rang once and he heard his Aldo’s voice, “Son, are you alright?”
“Hi Dad.  Yes I’m doing fine.  Safe for now.  How are you and Mom?  Safe as well?”
“Good to hear from you Boston.  Where are you headed now?”
“I’m surprised this phone has reception out here.  We are on our way to Stratus having left Grebes.”  Boston could hear his Dad’s worry increase, he could feel the uneasy feeling in Aldo’s heart.  Aldo’s response came just a fraction too late verifying Bostons hunch that he was worried for him.
“What’s there at Stratus for you?”
“Dad, don’t be worried, trust me we have been through some unbelievable things.  Things I wondered about being real or existing at all when I was younger.”
“Yes, Boston, but Stratus is not a place most people seek out.  When seeking out the unseen city there are few people who find it, and even fewer who return.”
“We must go.  Ludish needs to be stopped.  The leaves aren’t able to work properly and we can’t stand by when there is something to be done.  There is a creature we need to question that has been taken to Stratus, hopefully he has information to help us stop Luddish.  This is a moment people talk about.  A moment to have faith and believe there is a reason things happen.  I must discover what the leaves want me to do, and do it.”
“Boston, I love you.  Be safe, be careful.  I know everything will turn out okay.  Remember, if you get into trouble and need to run, be as fast as Barrus’ white ship.”
Boston found his head automatically nodding in confirmation knowing already Barrus’ ship was fast, then he remembered, he had never mentioned Barrus to his Dad.
“Dad, how do you know about Barrus, I never mentioned him to you?”
“Son, he is here, and there are marvelous things happening.  I wish I could tell you.  Oh, and he wants you to know he is not a traitor like you may be thinking.  I’m not sure why he wanted me to tell you that.”
Just then Talia’s ship was bumped by an unusually large wave causing the ship to sway.  The phone Boston and Chelsea had gained much strength from slipped from Boston’s hands and plummeted toward the dark waters overboard.  Boston extended his arm reacting as fast as his physiology would allow, but it was too late.  The phone was out of reach and hit the surface of the water as though it had a chain attached to Boston’s gut.  Boston felt he had dropped something much more precious than a mere phone, it was their only connection in a World losing connection.  The phone was gone to the sea.  
The night wore on yet Boston stayed outside looking forward into their path.  He could not sleep, not believing he had lost their only form of communication, plus he his mind wondered how Stratus would be.  The night wasted away and Talia’s valiant ship zipped through the waters toward Stratus the city that could not be seen.  No doubt Talia was still awake guiding the ships every move.  Tus was likely awake keeping Talia company through the night.
 Slowly the sun began to appear and a heavy fog arose.  Boston wondered how Talia knew where to go and though this could be an opportunity to ask her and Tus some questions about Stratus, questions he knew Chelsea would want to hear answers too as well.  He found Chelsea’s room and walked in.  He knew the idea that entered his mind would be cruel but thought to himself, the opportunity is too perfect to pass up.  Boston slowly and quietly walked over to where Chelsea was sleeping and leaned in close.  He lowered his arms to just above her shoulders and all at once grabbed her shoulders shaking and yelling, “Awwwwwww!”  Chelsea jumped up levitating out of bed and in complete terror through a punch out of flight or flight response.  The punch connected on Boston’s cheek.  It surprised Boston so much he fell backward and was caught by the same bed Chelsea had been sleeping on.  Almost in mid fall Boston started to laugh not expecting such a marvelous response.  The laughter was what allowed Chelsea to know who and what was happening.  
“Boston!  That was so mean!”  Chelsea jumped onto the bed and wrestling Boston down pinning him flat.
“I’m sorry.  I’m sorry,” said Boston.  “But I thought you would be interested to hear some answers about Stratus, no?”
“What now?  Yeah I guess so.”
“Yeah, I know it’s early morning, but I couldn’t sleep all night.  Oh, and by the way don’t trust ol Tommy Bocrow.  He sets himself up to be “lucky”.  It’s not what most people think.”
“Yeah I figured there was something up.”
“So anyway, lets go.”
They walked up to the door leading into where Talia was steering the ship.  The door was shut and had a carving on the outside.  The carving had the word ATOM across the top and below had a city meticulously etched into the wood.  There were groups of people outside buildings all looking like the others in their group.  There were two groups that gained Boston’s attention the most.  One group wore what looked like robes.  Above them was a cloud with other people on it wearing the same thing.  This group spread over much of the carved city and as Boston examined other parts of the city he could see individual people who wore the robe.  They were all throughout the city placed in specific locations.  The other group that interested Boston was not a group of people at all.  The group was an accumulation of brooms, papers, wheels, books, and other random objects.  The objects weren’t carved to be resting on some table or floor, rather they seemed to float in the air.  After they both looked at the carving a while Boston knocked.
“Come in.”
Upon entering the room Boston saw as he hoped, Tus and Talia wide awake.  It looked as though they had been laughing about something.  “Hope we are not interrupting,” said Chelsea.
“Nope come on in,” said Tus. 
“We thought we could give you some company, and ask some question about Stratus, if that’s okay,” said Boston.
“Sure is, come in, come in,” said Talia.  She was steering the ship and talking without looking away from the fogged path ahead.  The ship didn’t have any lights shining forward like a vehicle would.  The sun was the only source from which they had light.  Now that the sun was coming up, it revealed more and more how thick the fog was.  The very rays of light seemed to be swallowed up and strangled by the flowing wall of fog.
“How is it you know where you're going?” asked Boston.  “I know you have a compass, but even so, how is it you know this route so well?”
“We have been making extension attempts to reunite Grebes and Stratus once more into the great city Atom.  I have come to Stratus over and over again trying to work something out, but leave time and time again disappointed and we remain ununited.”
“So they are nice, they won’t cause us any harm right?”  Chelsea asked in a hopeful tone.
Tus stood up from one of the chairs, “Not quite.  You see, my beautiful Talia has to enter the city by disguise and meet with their leaders in private.  Granted the leaders of Straus are even headed most of the time, but the people in general hold a powerful grudge against any who are associated with Grebes.”
“Why are they called the city that cannot be seen?” asked Boston.
Talia pointed a finger forward, directing Boston to look through the window into the fog.  “What do you see Boston?”
“Right, well I see…”  Through the fog something was coming into vision.  The fog was lifting now, and he could see much further than before.  The ship was still moving quickly cutting thru the fog.  A large structure came to view.  The thickness of the structure was impressive almost intimidating, quite unusual to be in the middle of the sea, at least the sea upon which they were traveling, more of a canal.  The structure was not only four times as thick as many tree he had ever seen, but it expended upward so high Boston could not see the end of it.  By now the fog had almost entirely lifted revealing their surrounding.  Boston turned and walked outside being followed by Tus and Chelsea.  He looked all around the boat.  The fleeing fog allowed them to observe these wooden structures were all around them.  Yet looking into the now clear sky, Boston never could see the top of any one of the wooden poles.  
“What are those orange masses on the sides?” said Chelsea.
Boston looked up the poles about sixty yards, and too could see orange masses.  “They look like some sort of animal to me.  Weird how they are groups like that.  They are all perched there on the wood about sixty yards up and look they are evenly spaced from one another.  There must be a hundred of those things spaced like that to stretch around the entire width of those poles, and they are on every pole!”
Tus handed Boston some binoculars and said, “Go ahead, take a look.”
Boston put the binoculars to this eyes and found the orange masses of animal.  “Those look like orangutans.  Are those orangutans?”
“Not quite.  Those animals are Ulotops.  I don’t know if you have heard of them before but most people know they are quite aggressive in the wild therefore they stay away.”  Then Tus leaned in closer and lowered his voice.  “But they are usually sleeping, and they are deep sleepers.  Stratus puts food us there for the Ulotops so they will come and stay, and so they will prevent anyone from coming to Stratus.”
“Stratus?  Where is Stratus?” said Boston
“Exactly, the city that cannot be seen.  Stratus Boston, is up there.”  Tus pointed his finger toward the sky following the line of one of the large wooden poles.  “We must go up there if we want to get to Stratus.”
Boston, Chelsea, and Tus walked back in where Talia was.  She was steering the boat to the side of one of the poles.
“So what is up there?” asked Chelsea.
“It’s like any other city, they just built it on top of these synthetic trees,” said Talia.
“Synthetic?  That must have taken them years to do,” said Chelsea.
“Six months is all it took,” said Talia.
Once the boat was into position to the side of the pole, the rest of the ship’s crew surfaced from their rooms.  Red, Blue, and Tommy walked outside and took a look around.
Talia walked down to the deck of the ship joining Red, Blue, and Tommy.  “Alright Tommy, Mr. Lucky, we need your “luck” that Stratus’ leaders have this elevator unlocked.”  Talia put one leg over the ship and kicked the side of the giant synthetic tree.  Nothing happened.  She kicked again, and again nothing.  “Looks like we are climbing.”
“How long does the climb take?” asked Tommy.
“Have you never climbed before?” said Talia.  “With all your visits here?”
“Not once,” responded Tommy.  
Talia went to a box aboard the ship and pulled out what looked like sandals with a laptop attached to the bottom, there was enough for everyone to have one per foot.  “Alright everyone put these on but do not turn them on until you are next to this synthetic tree, or Strat as I call them.  Once these are on they create a bond with the Strat’s synthetic material and the side of your sandal so you can walk upright along the side the Strat.  Then as you move your foot to walk the bond breaks and allows you to move to the next step.  It feels weird at first walking as if on air, but trust me the bond created to the side of the sandal is strong and won't fail.”
Everyone put on the scandals and prepared for the climb.  Red and Blue were selected to carry most of the food and water.
“Let’s get started.  If we go quick we can make it halfway by nightfall,” said Talia.
Talia lead the way turning of the scandals and walking along side the Strat.  Red, Tommy, and Blue followed.  
“I’ll take the tail,” said Tus.
        “Hey Tus, what do we do when we are passing by those Ulotops?”
        “Boston, don’t worry.  Remember they are asleep.  Be quiet as we pass by and we should be fine.  But if one decided to wake up make sure and sing immediately.  Singing puts them into a daze and allows you to get a head start until they can no longer hear your voice.”
        The scandals worked extremely well, and they started to climb very quickly.  Sooner than expected Boston saw the Ulotops.  Up close they were a lot larger and had a wide mouth.  Boston imagined how it would be if one set it’s mind on attack and bit.  Talia stopped just before passing through one of the gaps between the animals.  She turned back and signaled to be quite.  Then she passed through.  Tommy was next.  He walked with a swagger as though fear had no place in him.  Boston knew the true Tommy usually had a trick up his sleeve.  Amongst the many items within Tommy’s clothing; he had put headphones on the outside of his pants hanging from a loop.  Boston remembered the words of Tus, “singing puts them into a daze.”  Tommy had to be playing music thinking it will protect him as he went by.  Boston’s thoughts raced, the music will put them in a daze but will it keep them asleep?  Quick steps followed his thoughts and he passed Chelsea getting closer to Tommy.  As Boston went to pass Blue, Blue stopped him with his large arm.
        “You won’t want to miss this,” said Blue, and they both paused watching as Tommy passed by the Ulotops.  Blue’s smile gave Boston some reassurance the situation was under control, while every step of Tommy cut away at the reassurance.  As Tommy and his playing music went by the creatures both animals on either side popped their eyes open.  The small many individual shelves on which each animal rested seemed to bend as the creatures stood up.  The noise of the first two animals waking alarmed their neighbors and like dominos all the animals began to arise.  Blue didn’t move a muscle.  Tommy’s cloak of no fear fell and diminished away the moment the Ulotops opened their eyes.  He reached down and fumbled with his clothes trying to find his music player trying to turn up the music as his only defense.  One Ulotop advanced toward Tommy opening it’s large mouth halfway advertising it’s sharp teeth.  The animal walked slowly, not in any hurry to obtain it’s prey looking well fed from Status’s generous supply of food in the Strat.  Its large arms reached out for Tommy who had all effort focused on finding the music.  It was no use, all the items amongst Tommy’s clothes prevented him from finding the music player.  The animal grabbed Tommy by the throat while the other Ulotops came closer to get their share.  Blue finally stepped forward walking in a completely calm demeanor and began to sing.  His voice bellowed deep and loud filling the crisp air.  Red and Tus joined in on the song.  Between the three of them the song was wonderfully loud as their denouement to Tommy’s crisis.  The Ulotops seizes all movement and stood frozen.  No muscle could be observed to move nor did they blink the daze was so strong.  Blue motioned for Boston and Chelsea to go on ahead.  Blue then grabbed Tommy by the waist with one arm much like the Ulotop, and pried open the Ulotop’s grasp on Tommy.
        “Get that music player out,” said Blue.
        Tommy quickly found the music player and handed it over to which Blue turned it to the loudest setting and rested it on one of the Ulotop’s shelves.  
        “They will probably eat this when the battery runs out,” said Blue.
        “I was in complete control there Blue, I’m not sure why you intervened,” said Tommy.
        “Always testing that luck Tommy,” said Blue.
        After a long day of endless climbing, they had set up for the night.  A new feature on the scandals allowed them an extended platform on which they could sit upon and sleep.  They had made it more than half way as estimated by Talia, and she said by the afternoon tomorrow they would be at the city.  Boston tried to see the bottom where their ship lay wait, but couldn’t see anything but white fog.  Above them looked dark yielding no details of the mysterious city.  The night came quickly yet no stars shone above their heads, Stratus’ city base was blocking all light.  Only out in the distance if Boston looked slightly above horizontal he could see some glimmering stars.  Chelsea set her small extended platform next to Boston and fell asleep.  Boston made sure he and Chelsea were well fastened in with their seat belt like harness and he fell asleep too.  The wind was very calm and clear, though as Boston fell asleep he was sure something unusual was bound to happen, he had felt the entire climb that there was something coming, coming for him.
Boston’s head shifted to the other side of his body, surprisingly he could sleep in this peculiar position, if I could just get this thing away from my face.  His own words rang in his head.  There is nothing for miles in front of me, what could be on my face?  The feeling persisted.  Boston came out of the half sleep haze but wisely kept his eyes shut.  The touch came again, it was a lite pressure poking his cheek.  Boston allowed one eyelid to open just enough to get some visual on the strange object.  The moment Boston saw what it was he sat straight up wide eyed and motionless.  The leaves had found him, after all this time without one single leaf finding him.  These leaves were small, there appeared to be ten or twenty of them grouped together an inch at the tallest point.  Boston held out his hand and the leaves settled smoothly down in his palm.  They changed shape forming a tree similar to the trees in Henderson park, the trees Boston knew had the doors.  Some of the leaves dropped to the side of the tree and formed people then the people went from under the tree into the trunk and out the door.  Once out the door they ran off Boston’s palm.  The leaves then all joined together to form the tree and together the leaves burst into fire.  It burnt Boston’s hand a bit and he pulled his arm back.  The leaves ashes fell slowly down into the dark.  Then Boston felt a hand on his shoulder and hear a voice telling him it was time to go.  He opened his eyes, he had been dreaming.  
“Boston let’s get going, looks like you slept great,” said Red.  “Hope your ready for part two of this climb.”
































        The door was similar to a submarines, circular including the handle that one would use to open the door.  It pushed up to open.  Talia was again first to peer into the world of Stratus.  
        They had reached the top of the Strat.  The bottom of the city was finally visible.  Amazing architecture, the bottom was uniformly flat resting on the Strat’s top no telling how far from the earth’s surface.  These submarine doors were the only access into the city.  The door wasn’t fantastically large, but Blue fit through without second thought.  
Boston climbed through the door and set eyes on Stratus for the first time.  Tommy could be seen just a distance off from the rest of the group.  He was spinning around and dancing.  He had a large smile on his face.  This was where he was most comfortable.  There was a light rain, very strange thought Boston, we are far above the clouds.  
“See there Boston,” said Tus.  “Tommy is here because he is well liked in Stratus.  He should be able to get us into the leaders of Stratus, that is if he holds true.”
“Yeah, hopefully.  But hasn’t Talia come here and knows the leaders?” asked Boston.
“She does.  But they aren’t so inclined to letting protectors into their little meeting rooms, let alone others.  Tommy thinks he can get us in no problem,” replied Tus.  “We could go in by force, between Red, Blue, and I, we could get in.”
Talia appeared by his side, “But we want to strengthen relationships here.”
“Right,” said Tus.  “By the looks of it, we are on the outskirts of the city.  We don’t want to be here, Stratus is not what it used to be.”
Boston looked around.  They were on the side of a road.  The road was dirt and there were no houses around.  It was difficult to tell what time is was, the sun was nowhere to be seen.  Stratus had a grey glow giving a possible time range from early morning to late evening, but Boston figured it to be about six based on how long they had been hiking.  There were trees along the side of the road make from the same synthetic material as the Strats they came up on.  Boston could not tell, but the trees looked to be occupied by curious eyes.  
“Something is coming,” said Blue.
The group gathered behind the closest tree hiding themselves from whatever was coming along the road.  Whatever it was, it was noise and large.  The noise indicated this thing was walking, but it was moving so fast.  The steps got louder.
Tus grabbed Tommy by the arm, “You’re up.  We are counting on you to get all of us into the leaders of Stratus.”
“No problem.  Watch, today I’m feeling lucky.”
The creature’s footsteps were close enough they should have seen the noises maker, but no visual could be located.  Tommy walked slowly out toward the dirt road.  Then from the sky above a giant foot slammed down on the road.  The noise was like thunder shaking the ground.  The leg was very thick and extended up into the sky revealing the giant of a creature.  It didn’t look like anything Boston had ever seen before.  Dark green skin, the shape of a giant human, but it was anything but human.  The creature was gone as fast as it appeared in just one step.  Tommy stayed by the road.
“What was that?” asked Boston.
“No idea,” said Chelsea.
Talia whispered over to Boston and Chelsea, “Like Tus mentioned, Stratus is not what it used to be.  Originally there were only the people from Atom here.  But Luddish’s fame and ideology spread along with this idea that if you have evil roots and a spirit not to follow the rules you would be welcome in Stratus.  It’s become this outlaw land.  That large creature there is named Frendo.  Don’t get confused thinking it means he is some good friend, no, the word is latin and it means crush as in destruction.  He’s crushed nine cities, nine.  There were thousands of lives lost to his enormous drive to destroy, and he did it with almost no difficulty from opposition.”
“If he is so powerful a creature, why would he be here in Stratus, why not continue in a rampage down below destroying however many cities he wants?  What’s stopping him?” replied Boston.
“It was the tenth city.  I’m sure it would have given Frendo great satisfaction to destroy ten cities, though his choice of city couldn’t have been worse for number ten.”
“Which city was that?” asked Chelsea.
Talia glanced over at Tus who stood near the road facing Frendo who by now had long gone, “The tenth city was Hindlighten.  What creature in any light, even half a candle light, would attempt to take out the home our protectors?  Tus lead the charge against Frendo.  They met him outside the city’s borders.  Tus had with him over one hundred protectors including Red and Blue.  Frendo stood no chance, he didn’t make it another step and upon total dominating defeat Frendo ran away never to be seen again by most people, unless of course you come to Stratus.  It is here that he hides out.”  
Along the road came another noise much quieter and less intimidating.  It was a small man with a wagon being pulled by two horse.  The wagon was quite large, wooden, and looked to be in good shape though the wagon had obviously been well used.  Over the top of the wagon was a large tarp which was propped up high enough a person could stand on the wagon and not have his head touch the tarp.  It covered any cargo from sight.  Tommy walked across the road to greet the man sitting on the right side of the wagon. 
“Well look who it is!” called out the old man.
“Barley good friend, how are you?  I told you I would be here right on time,” said Tommy.
“Yes, but we all know your a bag of tricks.  Who are your friends?”
“Oh, they are special guests for Prodigal and the leaders of Stratus.”
“Illusive as usual, do you know what will happen to me if I’m discovered?  Frendo will have me erased from this land.”
“Then we will be careful, yes?  Plus, you have the lucky Tommy on your side.”
“Alright Tommy, but let us hurry, Stratus is not the place it used to be.”
Tommy motioned for everyone to get into the wagon.  The top cover protected them from any curious eye.  Tommy took a seat next to Barley, and Barley started the wagon up again.  The motion of the wagon was rough on the dirt road.  Inside, Boston and everyone else found a seat on side benches running the length of the wagon on either side.  The wooden benches gave the bumps in the road extra emphasize on all poor souls sitting upon them.  Tommy and Barley could be heard talking through the covering on the wagon top.
“Onward Barley, onward to the leaders of this place,” said Tommy.  His voice had no hint of worry or care, more of a consequence free life.
“Tommy better come through for us,” said Tus.  “If trouble shows it’s face, I will have to act.”
“We have a ride, let’s see how far he can get us,” said Talia.
“Tus, you know we will be by your side, we have no fear of any creature that is here,” said Red referring to Blue and himself.
Tus continued to talk to Talia, Red, and Blue. 
Barley and Tommy’s voices slowly quieted down, then they couldn’t be heard at all.  Boston could tell they were still talking to each other with the sun casting a shadow of them both on the wagon covering.  Boston could see them leaning close together so they could talk quietly.  
“Chelsea, do you see that?  What could they be saying?  I need to know,” said Boston.
“I wonder, but we should stay inside the wagon.  It’s obvious they are hiding us, and probably for good reason.”
“Right.”  Boston’s eyes overlooked the wagon’s contents.  There were random supplies inside ranging from empty bottles, rags, blankets, and odd photos.  Blankets. . ., thought Boston.  It could work.  “Chelsea, could you keep Tus and the other’s distracted for just a few moments?  I’ll use the blankets here to stay hidden, and hand off the side of the wagon like drying rags.  I’ll be outside of Barley and Tommy’s view, but to whoever we pass I’m just an old blanket drying.  It will work right?”
“I don’t know Boston it’s risky, but it is weird they started talking quiet like that.  You can do it.”
Boston grabbed the old dirty blanket and wrapped himself in it at the end of the wagon farthest away from Tus and the rest of the group.  Chelsea turned to face the group sitting towards the back of the wagon to make sure they stayed interested in their conversation instead of what Boston was doing.  
Boston’s hand carefully pulled back on the wagon covering.  As it parted he could see the unique landscape of Stratus.  The land was unusually wavy and non uniform, so much so that it had the appearance of some strange war training grounds.  Boston noticed the ground had changed composition.  Instead of a dirt road it was a black material similar to asphalt but soft like dirt.  The wagon passed quickly by a road sign firmly placed on the side of the road reading: Do not touch the doghts inpowder, then the sign had a large arrow pointing to the road.  What is doghts inpowder? thought Boston.  He firmly grabbed one of the wooden poles erected from the side of the wagon to hold up the wagon covering, then he wheeled himself out of the wagon holding on with everything he had until his foot caught hold of some component of the wagon supporting him much easier.  Boston rearranged the blanket around his body so nothing was visible.  He could see the top of Barley and Tommy’s heads as they sat still talking in low voices close to each others ears.  The wagon was going slow enough that the wind didn’t pose much threat in drowning out their voices.  Boston focused and listened as well as he could while hanging.
“Frendo is the new leader for Stratus, Tommy.  I tell you Prodigal and his gang are out.”
“Frendo, huh.  No doubt he is a powerful man.  There may not be another man or thing that can oppose him, Stratus is his to take if he wants it.”
“Yes, and he does want it.  Most of the creatures here are willing to follow him, especially when he talks about building Stratus not crushing it down.  Frendo rarely speaks though, only when he needs to.  I think Prodigal and those fellows better make good with Frendo, else they might find themselves on the wrong side of the fense when our movement begins.”
“They would be a fool not to join him,” said Tommy.  “In fact, why not bring him a gift, since it’s him we are going to see.”  Tommy pulled out a glass jar from his plethora of attire and leaned off the side of the wagon.  The jar gently lowered near the doghts inpowder, and to Boston what seemed like a simple task of scooping up some of the black powder for a road, was being handled more than overly careful by Tommy.  He held the jar just inches from the road and waited for a small rise of the powder like a bump.  He looked forward into the slight breeze and looked out with a joyful face, he was enjoying his time here in Stratus.  The rise of the powder came and the wagon along with Tommy’s jar went through the bump easier than a lead ball through water.  Boston watched as the powder filled the jar with some of the powder dusting up off the road.  Tommy pulled his arm back up as fast as he could but along the way Boston saw the dust accumulate in an unordinary way and collect itself on Tommy’s right arm near the jar.  The dust stuck like glue and appeared to have a sense of life rather than some subjective mass.  As Tommy returned upright next to Barley he swiftly pulled his sleeves down covering both arms so as not to reveal the powdered arm.
“A jar of doghts inpowder should please Frendo, don’t you think?” said Tommy.
“Your a brave soul getting near that stuff,” replied Barley.
“Not just brave Barley my friend, lucky."
Boston pulled himself inside the wagon again.  From what he could tell, he had been undetected by the outside creatures including Tommy and Barley.  He pulled off the rags, and quickly sat down.  Chelsea was talking to the rest of the group, they hadn’t noticed, it appeared; that he had gone at all.  Chelsea came over to Boston and sat down.
“How’d it go?”
“Good.  Very interesting that Tommy.  You know that dark powder stuff on the road?  It’s called doghts inpowder and . . .”
“Do tell us all Boston what you have learned,” said Tus.  Boston looked over a bit shocked, he thought he had slipped out without detection.  “We are your protectors after all.”
“Right,” said Boston.  “Well, I noticed we are not on a dirt road anymore, what is doghts inpowder?”
The moment  Boston posed the question Tus rose up in an instant rage.  “I knew we were on them, I could feel it!”
“Tus, you can’t retaliate now, we need to stay hidden and keep as much peace as we can,” said Talia.
“Those are sacred paths, even in a place like this.  How dare they!  Riding over it like a road, as though it was nothing!” said Tus.
Talia kept nodded her head no.  Red and Blue responded by grabbing Tus’s arms standing on either side of him.  Boston doubted even Red and Blue could restrain Tus if he truly wanted to burst out of the compound in which they found themselves, though they could slow the explosive process.
When Tus seemed to be calming down Talia turned to Boston and Chelsea.  “Doghts inpowder are people.  When an exceptional man or woman dies, it is believed that the earth borrows, to be returned later; an extremely small piece of their body, then joins it with others.  These pieces go black with time.  When grouped together these pieces of body are called doghts inpowder which usually groups together in the form of what we call a road, or as I like to call it, a path.  When in full glory the path changes position over time.  One day you will find the path in plain sight in a well known location, then the next day it will be gone.  Legend tells that those paths are sacred, never to be touched by the living.  The movement is described as the return home where those small pieces of body travel back to heaven, where we all came from.  If a person touches the path all movement is stopped and it is thought the spirits or bodies of ancestors are not returned home.   And of course. . .” Talia paused then spoke in a louder voice angling her head toward Tus making sure he heard her next words, “. . . of course there are other legends that say no matter what, the spirits and bodies will be returned to heaven.  No living thing can stop their return.”
“Bottom line, touching doghts inpowder is extremely disrespectful,” said Boston.
“Yes.  These days, if you come by a moving path count yourself lucky.  Most paths are stopped like the one we are driving on.  Many people can’t resist touching the path for one reason or another,” said Talia.


“I also heard Tommy and Barley talking about seeing the real leader of Stratus.  Barley said it’s not Prodigal and his group anymore, its Frendo.  We are on our way to him.”
Tus stood back up this time determined to take control.  It reminded Boston of a hammer in a room full of mirrors.  The hammer was totally capable of braking anything else in the room, but it was told to wait, so there it sat watching the mirrors run around laughing at it and having their way with the hammer.  Now the hammer was about to be released.  Though as Tus moved toward the back of the wagon everything came to a stop.  The wagon wasn’t moving anymore.  Footsteps could be heard running away from the wagon.  They were the footsteps of Barley and Tommy running from whatever was about to happen.  There was an ominous feeling, a feeling like you're being watched by hiding eyes, but this time it wasn’t just one part of eyes it felt like hundreds were watching.  Most of their journey had been concealed, the landscape was a mystery much like the rest of Stratus.  Now they sat waiting for what Boston knew would be one of their greatest challenges yet, Frendo.
Suddenly the wagon shook, and the covering of the wagon was completely torn off.  Boston’s previous suspicions of watching eyes were validated as he could now see an arena format edifice surrounding them.  There were many creatures filling the vertical stoney seats on both sides of their wagon.  It reminded Boston of a college football stadium, packed with people, yet these creatures were worse than a brawl between the football teams.  The creatures moved and swayed back on forth.  They had a look about them waiting for something exciting to happen, something they could cheer for.  Then Boston saw the giant, Frendo.  He stood so tall his face was barely visible.  The man was a giant, and a strong one.  He had some covering about his body, of what material Boston could not tell.  The limbs and head of the giant were so large Boston wondered how this man would look if scaled down to normal size, things seemed to be way out of proportion when compared to a normal man’s arm, leg, or head length and size.  He stood still, facing the vulnerable wagon were Boston and his group sat trying to assess what to do.  Then came Frendo’s voice.
“Like robbers in the night many come to Stratus for hiding thinking they can live anyway they want, free of any problem.  I eventually find them or my empire finds them and we kindly offer membership, or death.”
The creatures in the crowd listening roared with cheers.
“Few there be who come directly to me.  One of you I know well, Tus,” said Frendo.  Then he took a knee and bowed down his face getting closer to the wagon allowing them all to see his face clear and close up.  He spoke a bit softer, “You must live off confidence from the victory of our last battle between us Tus, for not one particle of fear do I smell, yet you have come to the threshold of my house in nothing but a wagon.”  Frendo’s giant eyes, just like a human face; moved slowly looking to the left then to the right, “But Tus Tus, where are you’re legions of men today?”  He rose back up and spoke openly to all.  “This day you all will witness destruction of the greatest protector Hindlighten has to offer.  Then all will know it is I they must follow to be safe and live.”
Tus grabbed Boston by the shoulder, “Get off this wagon, now!  Leave this thing to me, and take everyone with you.”
Red and Blue pilled out of the wagon, “Do as he says, we will stay and help Tus win this fight,” said Red.
“You two need to go as well,” said Tus.  
Both Red and Blue paused to a moment then did as they were told grabbing Talia, Boston, and Chelsea, and running along the side of the doghts inpowder, the stopped path that lead them here.  Tus commenced to perform some movements apparently preparing for the war with Frendo.  The movements were ninja like, yet different than anything Boston had seen before.  Tus seemed unaware of his surrounding and focused only on the movements with his arms and legs.
Another voice rose above the rest coming from the east crowd of creatures.  “Frendo, Frendo my dear friend, you wouldn’t want to commence this slaughter without first showing our guests my gift to you now would you?” 
 Boston stopped running and looked to see who the voice was.  The crowd of creatures cleared a bit revealing one man in the middle, it was Tommy.
“Tommy.  Your timing is unmatched.  Surely you have a gift for me to enhance Tus’s destruction,” said Frendo.
“Most certainly,” said Tommy.  He then pulled out the jar with which he had collect doghts inpowder and held it up for Frendo.  “A gift from the one who is lucky to him who needs no luck.”
“Doghts inpowder?   I have endless powder here, it is worthless,” said Frendo.
“Worthless?  No, no, do take a look won’t you?”
Frendo’s large arm swung over and with two giant fingers he plucked up the jar.  The jar soared up toward his face.  Then Boston saw something he thought he would never see, Tommy looked over to Tus and winked to which Tus winked back.  Boston thought Tus despised Tommy but couldn’t help but see a demonstration of a much deeper trust of friendship than could ever be solidified within one moment with almost no exception to what that moment was.  Boston knew then that Tommy wasn’t who the person he had made him out to be, Tommy was a much different person.
Moments after Tus’s wink the small jar of black powder exploded with extraordinary force throwing Frendo’s head backward almost knocking him over.  Frendo regained his balance.  He immediately returned his vision to Tommy who shouted out, “Surprise!” and ran.
Frendo turned to face Tus, his face looked unharmed  Tus had finished the movements and was now completely honed in on Frendo walking at a quick pace right for him.  Frendo moved forward to accept the tiny challenge.  The distance between them shortened quickly as Frendo got into a sprint crying out in rage and revenge Frendo’s giant leg advanced forward to connect ultimate destruction to Tus’s body.  Tus didn’t move left nor right, but remained straight on a line for Frendo.  Suddenly as Frendo’s leg neared Tus’s body, Tus stopped mid step and his body when perfectly still. The leg hit it’s mark, but Tus didn’t move an inch.  Frendo’s foot stopped completely, accompanying it was a loud crack which was unmistakably the brake of the giant’s foot.  Tus unfroze and rocketed up through the air toward the face on Frendo.  The punch he delivered was so powerful Frendo’s body lifted from the ground several feet before returning to it horizontally.  Upon the ground Frendo tried sitting up, rolling to his side, and every swist possible but was unable to elevate himself again.  He was stuck on his back, fully conscious and to the eye of almost everyone fully capable to getting back up, yet he could not.  Boston watched as Tus stood arms folded talking aloud.   But what was it holding Frendo down?  What had such force, and where was it? thought Boston.  He looked close and saw the rare animal he had seen many days ago, it was Tus’s elephant.  The elephant must be invisible to all other eyes, at least that was Boston’s assumption since Frendo moved in frantic commotion but never attempted to get the elephant off from on top of him.  The elephant was not giant nor did it look to exert much energy holding down the largest men known to Boston.  It just stood in patience and peace.  
“Frendo is no leader nor is this his land.  But I said unto you all, let us go in peace to Prodigal and the leaders of Stratus, or I will go to them taking down anyone who stands between me,” said Tus.
The creatures in the stadium stone seating remained silent.  Their swaying motions eased and all eyes stayed on Tus.
“Thank you Tus, now, come this way,” said Tommy.  He had come from the crowds down by the wagon where Tus was standing.  “Good show old chap.”
Tus followed Tommy walking in a hurried state.  It was clear Tus was done waiting around.  Chelsea and the others had returned as well and they set off to see Prodigal and the leaders of Stratus.
        




        Their journey to see Prodigal and the leaders of Stratus proved to be easier than expected.  The fame of Tus defeating Frendo, again; had spread quickly across most of Stratus.  There was no creature that gave the group any trouble.  They walked fast and for hours.  Boston kept looking for a tall structure of a building signifying that to be the place of the leaders of Stratus, yet no such thing came into the horizon.  The walking drew on, though Tommy walked as if Prodigal would be right around the next corner.  
        The landscape was no special event.  Yet again Boston noticed uneven ground reminding him evermore of a battle prep location full of bunker like hole and divots.  Occasionally a small home would appear out of the evening mist.  The homes had a very modest look lacking special details and customization.  The yards and overall appearance seemed lacking, no one was taking care of these homes possibly no one was living in them.
        “At least I finally feel safe here,” said Chelsea to Boston.
        “I was thinking the same thing, we haven’t been bothered by an creatures for hours.”
        “I guess Frendo was the king bee that needed a reality check.  I wonder if we will find Barrus, and those guys along with the creature that was a fake on Talia’s ship.”
        “I’m sure they are with Prodigal, thought I guess they could have gone anywhere.”
        “Look Boston, Tommy is knocking on that small house’s door.  That is the home of the leaders of Stratus?”
        “I guess so.  Be ready for anything.”
        The door Tommy was knocking looked very similar to the door on Talia’s ship.  It was a map of a great city.  The details started to sink into Boston’s mind, then the door opened.  A thin man was standing at the other end.  He had old clothes on, and a longer beard but Boston could tell he wasn’t yet forty years of age.  His eye’s looked over the group of seven and locked in on Talia and Tommy.
        “Well, come in,” said the man.
        They followed him down a long hallway that declined into the ground.  Looking back Boston could see the entire home was nothing more than that hallway they had just passed through.  Along the walls hung paintings of old men, women, and families.  The lighting was low making it difficult to discern who the people were.  They continued down the hall and through another door which had an inscription reading, ‘Leaders of Stratus’.  This room was almost too good to be true.  There hung from the vaulted ceilings large chandeliers with hundreds of tiny glass objects cut with great skill to look magnificent.  The chairs alone was fancy let alone the people sitting in them.  Their clothes were very fine and unique, unlike most Boston had ever seen.  At the far end of the large room was an enormous window.  Outside the window was well lit up showing the outer ground of the house.  Apparently the backyard dipped downward because the outside of the back of the house was no longer underground such as the front end of the room.  Outside Boston could see a yard extend back maybe ten yards then it ended into a black abyss.  We must be at one of the edges of Stratus, thought Boston.  
When Talia and Tommy walked through the door the people inside all stood.  A heavy set man spoke, he wore a kingly hat and held a finely decorated cane that he never allowed to touch the ground as he walked about the room.
        “Welcome back Talia, Tommy.  I see Tus has come along.  We have already received word Frendo has been defeated, and stays pinned down.”  Several of the people standing next to him let out a laugh.  “We, the leaders of Stratus know some of you but not all, who have you brought us?”
        “It’s good to see you too Norden,” said Talia.  “Spokesman I see, like usual.  I am surprised you a leader of Stratus did not recognize Red and Blue.”  Talia pointed out Red and Blue, they took a slight bow.
        Nordin’s face took a worried wrinkle.  “Three protectors?  What is the meaning of this, why had you come anyway?  Who are the others with you?”
        “Nordin, you know a great deal why we have come.  Barrus, Huch, and Lottian have taken one of the creatures that follow Luddish.  They told us they were coming here to Stratus.  That creature may hold very important information, information we are ready to get one way or another.  Now, we have come with Tommy to keep the peace and have taken out your rival for you.  Now where are those men?”
        “Talia, you always had great confidence, but when Prodigal lets you in so easily without any questions, lets the entire group into the leaders union so easily, I must assume you come offering gifts of some sort.  You couldn’t have come just asking from us, the outlaws, right?” said Nordin.  
        Boston whispered as soft was he could to Chelsea, “The man who let us in, that’s Prodigal.”
        “What’s that young man?” said Nordin.  “You there, speak up, what’s your name?”
        Tus spoke before Boston had a chance to answer, “He is with us, what more need you know?”
        “Believe me Tus, you would win in a fight, but you will never break my will.  Who are you boy!”
        “My name is Boston.”
        The name got the attention of the leaders, especially Prodigal.  “And the girl?” said Nordin.
“Chelsea.  She is with me,” said Boston.  
“Yes of course, of course,” said Nordin.  He turned and walked away from Boston and Chelsea.  “I will strike a deal, your group stays here to talk to the creature that Barrus, Huch, and Lottian so kindly brought us, and you allow Boston and Chelsea to come with me for a walk out back.  Tus, Red, and Blue cannot disappear at any moment or the deal is off and the creature will be taken away along with the whereabouts of your friends.  Deal?”
By the look of Talia’s face Boston knew she was hesitant to go along with the deal, but he knew it was going to be the only way to get what he thought they came for.
“Nordin, you got a deal,” said Talia.  Tus nodded his head in approval.
“How wonderful.  Chelsea, and what was it, oh yes, Boston, do come with me.  Ret, show these good people to the creature,” said Nordin.
Most of Stratus’s leaders got up and went into another room while this other man, Ret, extended his arm insisting Talia, Tus, and the rest of the group to come through another door.  Tus was the last to follow Ret and as he departed he gave Boston a wink, similar to the one Tommy and him had given each other before taking down the giant.  The wink gave Boston hope that Tus wasn’t worried for him and that things would be okay, but he couldn’t help but feel unsettled about the character and plans of Nordin.  
“Right this way,” said Nordin pushing a set of four books into one of the book shelves on the wall.  The book case made a noise of things moving, and there appeared a doorway.  The secret passage was well hidden, it hadn’t looked like a doorway to the least bit until the book had been pushed inward.  The door swung out to the outside.  Nordin walked through and into the illuminated landscape provided by the glowing outside mounted lights.  Night had come, making the nothingness of the end of the lawn feel not just dark with no stars, but almost unreal like a canvas, flat and without depth.  It seemed matter did not extend past that point, but Boston knew the smog and air of Stratus could never be trusted.  Off that edge was one of the furthest drops known to man, a drop Boston wanted to stay far away from.  
Boston grabbed Chelsea by the hand and whispered to her once again, “Let’s stay away from that edge.”
“Planning on it,” said Chelsea.
Nordin was much less concerned where he walked.  He ventured out to just a few steps from the grassy edge and stood looking out into the black nothing.  Boston and Chelsea followed him but kept plenty of yards back to feel somewhat safe.
“So you’re the one everybody has been talking about lately,” said Nordin.
“I thought you didn’t know who I was,” said Boston.
“Of course I do, leaf boy.  Problem is I don’t believe all the stories.  Why would the leaves follow you when they could have chosen so many others?”
“What is it you want Nordin?”
“That is my exact question.  Did you all really come up here just to see a creature?  There are so many of them.”
“Thats why we came.  Were you looking for another reason?”
“Well, yes.  I want the leaf master to beg our return to Atom, I want the one everyone is talking about to beg me and ask of me.  I’m sure Talia did not ask you to persuade me and the rest of our kind to join you, but to be honest I don’t need much persuasion.  I’m assuming you know what Atom is.”
“Yes, we know it was the city you once were apart of.  It split into Stratus and Grebes over what Ludish was doing and the leaves.”
“Correct.  Now Stratus is so different than when we were here.  Strange creature keep flooding in, interestingly most of them want to take the place over.  It’s nothing like Atom was, a city with so much of offer collecting not creatures of the dark, but noble groups that produce good.  Its something I miss, but for us to reunite things will have to be run our way, and that is what Talia has been so stubborn about.  Think for a moment Boston what if you were the median through which Stratus reunited once again with Grebes!  Atom would stand strong once more calling back all the wonderful groups it once housed.  You would be legend and a person remembered for years to come.  Agree with me now to reunite us under my terms, and the honor is yours.”
Boston knew immediately Nordin’s terms must be wrong if Talia wasn’t agreeing to them.  He knew she wanted Atom back as much as any other, but for her to be unmoved by Nordin’s terms Boston spoke with reserve.  “What are your terms?”
“Peace my boy.  Let the leaves come flowing back to all people.  We can figure out a way to force the leaves to do what we want, then everyone can have a mission of their own.  You just may be the key we were waiting for.  There would be no sadness, forced happiness if possible.  We wouldn’t allow failure, it wouldn’t be a choice.”
“That sounds too familiar to Ludish’s plan.  Nordin, we won’t help you.  That is not the way things are supposed to be.  It is you who must change, it is you who must not be stubborn of this thing.  What does a person learn and where is there progression if  they are forced to succeed?”
“Progression?  What do I care if a person is progressing?  All I care about is getting a person from point B to point A, it’s not about what they learn along the way.”
“It’s all about what they learn along the way!” said Chelsea.  “Nordin you must see that.”
Nordin was surprised Chelsea answered so in tune with Boston.  “So that’s how you two feel is it?” 
It was at that point Boston realized where now stood.  He was sure during this entire conversation neither he nor Chelsea had taken a step toward Nordin, yet now he was inches from them.  Nordin hadn’t taken a step toward them either.  How was that possible, thought Boston.  Then Boston saw Nordin’s backdrop hadn’t changed.  There still was darkness, and nothingness.  He was at the lawns edge.  Something had happened, the lawn move, shortened, something!  Boston and Chelsea now found themselves not only inches from Nordin, and right at the edge of Stratus.
Nordin got a smile on his face making Boston feel more uncomfortable.  Neither Chelsea nor Boston dared move at this point fearing Nordin would lash out at them.  Movement was not on the mind, rather to remain motionless hoping not to be seen by a predator.  Striking quick like a cobra, Nordin reached out and grabbed Chelsea by the arm.  Chelsea screamed out as Nordin shoved and held her over the edge of Stratus.  Off the edge was so far down the bottom could not be seen, there was only a dark hungry emptiness.  
Boston cried out, “Nordin, stop!”
“If you truly are the one, the only one the leaves will follow then you can call out to them to catch your love Chelsea.  You can control them, show us all Boston, show us you are the one in control of the leaves.”
Chelsea hung over the edge, her toes barely touching the ground to hold herself upright.  Nordin had such a strong grip on her arm it was useless for Chelsea to try and fight, if anything it would cause them both to fall into the abyss below.  
“It doesn’t work like that Nordin, don’t drop her,” said Boston.  His voice was laced with deep emphasis.  There was nothing more important to him than being with Chelsea, he couldn’t lose her.  Chelsea’s hair blew in the breeze coming from the edge of Stratus’s world.  Things seemed to shake, the wind seemed to move more quickly, and Boston felt the adrenaline flowing from head to toe.  Behind Boston appeared all three protectors.  Tus’s face was most focused.  Boston know now if Chelsea was dropped One of them would simply catch her then appear back to safety.  Nordin knew as much about protectors as Boston did, yet he continued to hold Chelsea out over the edge.  The added comfort of the protectors allowed Boston’s nerves to relax.  He noticed the perceived increase in wind was no imagination, the wind had really picked up.  Then came a powerful noise, like great waters and the sounds of thunder.  Something was happening.  The ground started to shake slightly.
“Let the boy call on the leaves Tus, We all know you could catch her, but where is prove this is the one the leaves will follow?” said Nordin.
Tus didn’t say a word and remained focused.  The noise grew louder and the ground shook more violently.  The wind blew much harder making it difficult for Nordin to maintain his hold on Chelsea.  
“What is happening?” Nordin yelled out.
“Let her go,” yelled Tus.
The ground shook with now greater intensity.  The wind was so strong a person would be lifted from the ground if in the direct path, yet the wind only came from the edge of Stratus and was oddly directed upward toward the sky.  The shaking became so regular and powerful Nordin could hardly keep his feet and threw Chelsea onto the lawn.  Boston rushed over to her and held her for dear life.  Tus, along with the others found a nearby structure and held on as tightly as possible.  Stratus seemed to be having a thunderstorm, tornado, earthquake, and altogether chaos simultaneously.  Boston’s vision looked toward the sky above Stratus and where they had been nothing to see but smoggy black, there began to be speck of light that populated one horizon to the next.  The specks turned into bright bursts of light.  The stars looked to be falling from the sky heading for Stratus, then Boston realized what was happening, they were the ones moving.  Stratus was being lifted toward the heavens.  The notion of being lifted up for the good deeds of Stratus was far from what was happening.  A great force was showing itself, not as a sign to Nordin, but as a call to all people of Stratus.  
Nordin crawled over the the edge desiring to see how this was possible.  He forced his head over the earthy side and cried out, “Millions, there was millions of leaves!”  
The ground encompassing Nordin became very unstable, and cracks became appearing.  It was not longer than a second after the cracks appearing that Nordin disappeared from sight.  The ground supporting him gave way and sent Nordin tumbling into the dark below.  The wind was not blowing him or any of the fallen earth back up.  They fell with great acceleration.
The noise became to lower along with Stratus.  Off the edge could be seen one of the most magnificent things Boston had ever witnessed.  A wall of leaves rose from the cities edge.  Boston was such the wall ran the circumference of the city there being no breaks along the wall of leaves.  The city continues to lower and the wall of leaves grew taller.  The leaves had a special look about them.  They gave off a light, some magnetic pull of attention.  They looked happy softly floating toward the heavens.  This sight seemed much more right, these leaves were heavenly.  Their colors would catch the star light and fully illuminate.  Reds, purples, oranges, whites, and many more colors introduced themselves to the sky and the people of Stratus.  These leaves are not controlled by Ludish.  The leaves are not controlled by Ludish,  thought Boston.






































































        “I speak for the entire city of Stratus.  Boston, we will follow you.  We have been in want, and desire to reunite our city with Grebes, the way it was once before.  Now is that time.  Atom will be strong and united once again.  This is the moment, and we are ready,” said Prodigal.  He spoke with authoritative voice and a confidence strong enough to dwarf any listeners dought.  Boston along with the rest of his group and hundreds of other residents stood listening to Prodigal speak.  They were outside by the small home they had entered just the night before.  The people of Stratus had been drawn out by the unreal almost unbelievable events of the leaves lifting the city.  This particular morning felt new in Stratus.  Not only were hundreds of Stratus’s residents out gathered together in peace, but they, including Boston; were standing with new found respect for the power of the leaves.  Boston had been on the leaves side the entire time, though many of the people of Stratus would of had the leaves controlled.  But today everyone was thinking alike.  The thoughts on everyone’s mind was similar to these, The leaves are in control of what they do.  We must learn from them, not try and control them.  Additionally one of the most important feelings running around Stratus was the feeling to reunite with Grebes and establish Atom.  Most people originally from Atom now living in Stratus didn’t like how things were going.  Frendo had been put in his place, but that would only stop him and his plans of taking over for a few months.  Overthrowing would continue to be attempted, and from what Boston gathered, the people loved how Atom was and the groups it attracted.  Carvings on doors of Atom and various groups that would live there allowed Boston some knowledge of these groups.  The city sounded amazing, and the best part were the people within its walls.  Prodigal was saying it best, and standing on a small stump he spoke loud influencing words.
        “Have we not seen the leaves act?  They are not being controlled by Ludish, and how long has he been gone now?  They do not minister to us because we do not receive them.  We would have them come to us by force, and now we all know this is wrong.  Let us turn from these things and way of thinking.  Are we happy here?  Yet I would say all of us remember how happy we were at Atom.  Let us go and establish the city with Grebes, the city we all loved, and love.  The wonderful groups will return with us.  I hope you all are with me including those who cannot be here or cannot hear my voice.  But I tell you this, I am going.  If you are with me, Boston, and Atom, then prepare yourselves, we leave as once,” spoke Prodigal.   
        The people were greatly moved.  When Prodigal ended his speech, the people roared with applauses.  They had been waiting for this speech, and now they stood ready to reunite.  The group started to disperse to their homes and pack whatever items they thought necessary.  Some members of the group had already packed, they came to Prodigal ready to leave immediately.  
Prodigal turned to Boston, “Thank you for coming.  Please come with me down our elevators and back to where Atom once stood.  There these people can rest and wait for those at Grebes.”  He then turned to Talia, “Do you think Grebes will be ready to reunite?”
“If you are, I’m sure they are.  We will need to be persuasive, they have their suspicions and reservations.  You will need to assure them your complete separation from Ludish and his ways,” said Talia.
“Of course, whatever it takes.  We don’t want to live like this anymore and can see our faults,” said Prodigal.
“We believe you, though just to be safe we will keep a good watch, and not just Red, Blue, and I, but many protectors,” said Tus.
“You have the right and our blessing to do so Tus.  I just hope Grebes is willing to take us back,” said Prodigal.
Talia gave Prodigal a smile, “They will.”
Prodigal lead the way to the elevators of Stratus.  The large wooden posts that support the unseen city extended past Stratus’s ground level up twenty yards.  On the north end of the wooden posts were openings.  Prodigal stepped inside the opening and into a metal box.  
“Boston, come inside.  This will take us all down to the waters,” said Prodigal.
Boston walked onto the elevator with Chelsea and the group.  The same thing was happening to hundreds of other wooden support posts around Stratus.  People were filing in following their leader Prodigal.  The movement was so sudden and collective it was overwhelming.  The people of Stratus had been so tired of the conditions of Stratus that when the leaves demonstrated such a miraculous event the people decided enough was enough was enough and wanted to leave to rebuild Atom.  
Going down the elevator Boston couldn’t help but think about the underground cities Tus had been describing to him.  Boston wondered if this is what it would feel like when they found a tree with a door, with an elevator.  He deeply wanted to find those trees and fulfill the mission he leaves had for him.  Within him remained a feeling that this was not all, possibly not his mission.  It was a mystery to him, but for now that was what the end mission was, find the doored tree, go down and help those trapped people.  He was determined to do it, and knew Chelsea would support him and be there with him the entire time.  She had a desire to help the mission in all ways possible. 
The elevator lowered with great speed, symbolic in a way to the haste Stratus was showing in their desire to return to Atom.  Inside Prodigal remained silent, characteristic on his personality.  There were some of the other leaders of Stratus in the elevator with them.  One lady was quietly crying being help by another man also a leader of the city.  Prodigal leaned over to Tus and whispered.  Boston was close enough he could overhear what Prodigal was saying.
“Cambria.  The daughter of Nordin.  There is no way Nordin survived that fall.  She is the complete opposite of Nordin, she being nice, charitable, kind, and lived much more like those in Grebes than the creatures in Stratus.  She will be fine.  The man comforting her is Nordin’s brother.  He too is a good man.  Somewhere along the way Nordin lost control as we all did buying into Ludish’s plans.”
Boston looked back over to Cambria, she was still crying, just loud enough to be heard by all in the large elevator.  Chelsea walked over to her and grabbed her by the hand.  Cambria looked up with eyes full to tears.
“There’s probably nothing I can say that will fully comfort you.  But we are here for you and are proud of you for your decision to come back to Atom.  I’m Chelsea.”
“Thank you, I’m Cambria.”
Chelsea was one of the most charitable persons Boston knew.  her ability to comfort was divine.  
They continued down for what Boston estimated to be about three hours.  The elevator was not slow by any means yet three hours they came screaming downward.  
Prodigal eventually moved to the large door, they were slowing down.  They came to a stop and the door opened.  The light of day was brighter than Boston remembered, it shining directly into their eyes blinding them partially.  Then Boston spotted their ride.  Barrus, Huch, and Lottian stood on Barrus’s white boat looking over the edge at their soon to be guests.  They had smiles on their faces and were happy to see them.  Tus rushed to the front of the elevator doorway, extended his hand, and was lifted aboard Barrus’s ship.
“Next time communicate.  Good to see you fellows again,” said Tus.
“Good to see you all.  Got what you needed?” said Barrus.
“Yes, yes we did,” replied Tus.
Talia was next to be helped aboard.  “Well done you three.  Well done.”  
The smiles continued on Barrus’s ship.  Tus had walked off with Huch and Lottian talked and laughing.  Talia was going over to join them while Barrus continued to help a few more people onto his smaller boat.  Chelsea was next then Boston.  
“So good to see you two.  Looks like you have held up nicely.  Barrus, I talked to my Dad just the other day.  He said you were there.  What were you doing?” asked Boston.
Barrus leaned close to Boston’s ear.  “I’ll explain later, yeah?”  Then he extended his arm for Red and Blue to come aboard.  They both took few steps back behind Prodigal then ran forward grabbing him along the way and jumped up onto the ship.  Prodigal laughed and told them thanks.  Cambria was next, but when she got aboard Barrus announced the small ship was full.  
Cambria looked over to her uncle.  He spoke before she could, “You’ll be fine.  I’ll meet you in Atom, you're in good hands.”
“I’ll see you soon,” said Cambria.
        Barrus ran over to the ship’s controls and turned the ship from the elevator revealing one of the most beautiful sights he had ever been a witness to see.  There were more than a hundred ships more coming to pick up the people of Stratus as more elevators arrived.  The ships were waiting for them, and waiting in good anticipation.  The part that made this event beautiful, the ships were the ships of Grebes.  Boston looked over at Chelsea who was just as impressed as he was.  Then he looked over to Barrus was now standing with Huch and Lottian.  All three of them looked back at Boston with great smiles, proud smiles.  They had done something truly amazing, they were not traitors, not even closes.  They were missionaries, wisely orchestrating a large portion of the reuniting.  Barrus’s ship passed other ships where Boston could hear cries of affection.  
        “Joshua, over here!  Joshua!”
        “Ming, oh it’s so good to see you.  Welcome back, welcome back.”
        These people were more than two cities coming back together.  They were separated families.  The reunions on those many ships were endless.  Celebrations were starting.  One by one the ships would turn once full and follow Barrus’s ship.  They had a full fleet of ships, all moving upon once troubled waters traveling collectively as one of the happiest groups to sail the waters.  Not only had Stratus been ready to come back to Atom, but Grebes had been ready to receive Stratus and establish their beloved city.  Thus when the movement began it was easy to keep moving.  These people wanted Atom back, and now was the time. 
Boston walked over to Barrus.  “Barrus you must tell me what you have been up to.”
“All in good time Boston,” responded Barrus.
“How did you guys get all of Grebes on board to reunite with Stratus?  And how did you know we would be back so soon?”
“Atom was calling.  You saw how easily the people of Stratus moved once the decision was made to go back.  It was a lot of the same in Grebes.  Plus people want to see their families.  Unfortunately, not all of Grebes is here.  Everyone here is setting sail to Atom, and a part of Grebes remain on the waters.  We will have to go out and persuade them to come back.  Prodigal will be a big part of that.  So I will guide these good people to Atom, then we must go out and procure the rest of Grebes.  They are just timid, still hurt from what happened before.  I feel like we all have learned our lesson.  When Atom is rebuilt, we won’t make that mistake again.  Plus, I don’t think the leaves will let us.”  He laughed, and looked over the open waters.  “We have been waiting for this moment for a long time.  It’s beautiful.”